charms

section: created by death
this category is pretty self explanatory, bug dies and charm is made.
baldur shell  
protects its bearer with a hard shell while focusing soul.
the shell is not indestructible and will shatter if it absorbs too much damage
created from the death of the eldur baldurs in their den in the howling cliffs.
dashmaster  
bears the likeness of an eccentric bug known only as 'the dashmaster'.
the bearer will be able to dash more often as well as dash downwards.
perfect for those who want to move around as quickly as possible.
the statue of the dashmaster has the dream nail dialogue, 
“...dash faster...
dash further...
dash forever…”
from there we extrapolate that this charm was created by their desire as they died.
fury of the fallen  
embodies the fury and heroism that comes upon those who are about to die.
when close to death, the bearer's strength will increase.
glowing womb  
drains the soul of its bearer and uses it to birth hatchlings.
the hatchlings have no desire to eat or live, and will sacrifice themselves to protect their parent.
due to you finding it on the dead body of an enlarged aspid mother with the dream dialogue “...breed…” we put it here.
heavy blow  
formed from the nails of fallen warriors.
increases the force of the bearer's nail, causing enemies to recoil further when hit.
assumed to be formed at the time of the warriors’ deaths.
sprintmaster   
bears the likeness of a strange bug known only as 'the sprintmaster'.
increases the running speed of the bearer, allowing them to avoid danger or overtake rivals.
this is here because of how much it resembles dashmaster.
sly does say that it is a “recent addition to my collection,” despite also saying all the new stock he gets from the shopkeeper’s key are “time-worn.” could sly have known the sprintmaster, and be connected to their death?
probably not, it is most likely a reference to how this charm was added in the grimm troupe dlc, but who cares about references?
after all, mr. mushroom is 100% lore friendly in all of his dialogue.
section: created by bug
these are charms that a bug created for a purpose.
carefree melody  
token commemorating the start of a friendship.
contains a song of protection that may defend the bearer from damage.
this is a charm gained from a nice bug named nymm, it is what replaces the grimmchild charm.
while it does heavily resemble grimmchild, i am keeping it in created by bug and not higher being.
it is not an event because you do not have it replace the grimmchild, you lose the grimmchild and nymm gives you this.
while i assumed that nymm created it they have forgotten where they “came upon it.” implying that they did not create it.
this could be instead a reference to further troupe lore, or it is a reference to the kingdom in silksong.
it does contain a “song of protection” that could hint at the connection to the kingdom “haunted by silk and song.”


dreamshield  
defensive charm once wielded by a tribe that could shape dreams.
conjures a shield that follows the bearer and attempts to protect them.
created and wielded by the moth tribe.
it is interesting that markoth also uses them, and you can see one resting on his body.
so that would imply that the physical effects of a charm stick around after death?
or perhaps that they were not always charms.
though this does allow us to state that charms have been around before the pale king.
dream wielder  
transient charm created for those who wield the dream nail and collect essence.
allows the bearer to charge the dream nail faster and collect more soul when striking foes.
the seer states that this charm is “plucked from one of my most precious memories” so i would state that we attribute the creation to her.
what is interesting is the word transient which means “lasting only for a short time.”
why is this charm not permanent?
we never see it go away either.
also there is an interesting thought that charms could be created from essence.
fragile charms
we know from leg eater’s dreamnail dialogue that he created these charms “i'll make more... and they'll give me more geo.”   
the question of how he was able to create these charms, and why they are fragile until divine digests them does not have an answer.
it is interesting to note that the casing of the charms slightly resembles the object that leg eater is sitting next to.
fragile greed  
causes the bearer to find more geo when defeating enemies.
this charm is fragile, and will break if its bearer is killed.
fragile heart
increases the health of the bearer, allowing them to take more damage.
this charm is fragile, and will break if its bearer is killed.
fragile strength
strengthens the bearer, increasing the damage they deal to enemies with their nail
this charm is fragile, and will break if its bearer is killed.
joni’s blessing  
blessed by joni, the kindly heretic.
transfigures vital fluids into blue lifeblood
the bearer will have a healthier shell and can take more damage, but they will not be able to heal themselves by focusing soul
this charm requires a jump in logic from the dialogue of joni, “i see you bear my blessing.
i can't remember giving it, but my memory has been a little lacking of late.” while this charm at first seems to be created from the death of joni, the fact that she knows what the blessing is, and that she seemed capable of giving it implies that this was created before her death.
there is an argument to be made that the blessing when she was alive was not a charm, but the dialogue is triggered by you obtaining the charm, not wearing it.
mark of pride  
freely given by the mantis tribe to those they respect
greatly increases the range of the bearer's nail, allowing them to strike foes from further away
any charm that is “freely given,” even with a prerequisite, would imply that it is able to be replicated.
this would mean that the mantis tribe is able to create charms, and they are not fragile, nor are they created from essence like how i theorized that the moth’s created their charms.
nailmaster’s glory  
contains the passion, skill and regrets of a nailmaster.
increases the bearer's mastery of nail arts, allowing them to focus their power faster and unleash arts sooner.
this one takes some assumptions.
first we have the dialogue from sly: 
“but as the great nailsage i must recognise your skill.
you have mastered the arts of my remaining pupils.
now tradition decrees you too may hold the symbol.”
going line by line:
sly is “the great nailsage,” implying that he is the only one.
from “remaining pupils” we can assume that there were more than three in the past.
“tradition” implies that this is not a new charm, and that it has been passed down.
going further we can see that this is not the charm wielded by nailsages, due to him still referring to you as nailmaster.
going off on a tangent this would mean that to be a nailmaster you must master all three nail arts, and that a nailsage is something more.
returning back to the charm it refers to “a nailmaster” this could be taken in different ways.
either it means that when a nailmaster dies this charm is formed, or that there was a specific nailmaster that was able to make multiple of these charms to be passed down.
there is further dialogue from sly about the charm saying that, “you shall be the last to receive its like.” the two words “its like” confirms that there are multiple of this charm.
after talking to other nailmasters they say that “only the great nailsage himself could have bestowed such a thing.” which is pretty straightforward, this is a tradition of the sage giving the charm away.
these assumptions work off of the thought that the three other nailmasters also have this charm, but i think this is likely given how easily they recognize it.
so we have a case for there being multiple of this charm created by a singular nailmaster, who may have become the first nailsage, and a tradition of passing this charm down.
sharp shadow  
contains a forbidden spell that transforms shadows into deadly weapons
when using shadow dash, the bearer's body will sharpen and damage enemies
based on the fact that this was a spell that was then forbidden, it makes sense that a bug created said spell.
probably connected to the ancient civ given that it was weaponizing shadows and the charm itself is found on a corrupted soul totem.
soul catcher  
used by shamans to draw more soul from the world around them
increases the amount of soul gained when striking an enemy with the nail.
we see a purpose for this to be created, and we have a creator all in the first line.
soul eater  
forgotten shaman artifact, used to draw soul from still-living creatures
greatly increases the amount of soul gained when striking an enemy with the nail
despite being found next to a sarcophagus containing a snail shaman, the fact that this is an “artifact” makes me believe that this was buried with the shaman.
weaversong  
silken charm containing a song of farewell, left by the weavers who departed hallownest for their old home
summons weaverlings to give the lonely bearer some companionship and protection
again we have a clear creator in the description.
not much lore is available right now from this charm, but hopefully with silksong’s release we get more information and can update this.
section: created by higher being
these charms were created by higher beings

defender’s crest  
unique charm bestowed by the king of hallownest to his most loyal knight.
scratched and dirty, but still cared for.
causes the bearer to emit a heroic odour.
based on the word unique we infer that this charm was created by the pale king and given to ogrim.
was this charm originally white?
was this the only charm ever made for one of the knights, it only says that the charm is unique, not the act of making charms for the knights.
it would be interesting to see what each knight would have for a charm.
although isma has the tear and hegemol the city crest, the other two knights do not have a unique item obtainable from them.
grimmchild  
worn by those who take part in the grimm troupe's ritual.
the bearer must seek the grimmkin and collect their flames.
uncollected flames will appear on the bearer's map
symbol of a completed ritual
contains a living, scarlet flame
created by the nightmare heart for the ritual.
shape of unn  
reveals the form of unn within the bearer
while focusing soul, the bearer will take on a new shape and can move freely to avoid enemies
we know that this was created by unn considering she spits it at you.
section: created naturally
these are charms that were created by the environment or passively.
deep focus  
naturally formed within a crystal over a long period.
draws in soul from the surrounding air
the bearer will focus soul at a slower rate, but the healing effect will double
“naturally formed.”
kind of interesting that these charms that draw in soul are formed naturally, a ginormous  stretch is that the soul totems work like this charm.
also interesting that the grey material is also natural.
flukenest  
living charm born in the gut of a flukemarm
transforms the vengeful spirit and shade soul spells into a horde of volatile baby flukes
this charm is “born” which makes me think that it naturally formed without there being a conscious choice to do so.
an interesting interpretation of this charm is that this mimics flukemarm using its own lifeforce/soul to create her offspring.
also the words “a flukemarm” shows that there is more than one flukemarm, and that this charm is not unique.
hiveblood  
golden nugget of the hive's precious hardened nectar
heals the bearer's wounds over time, allowing them to regain health without focusing soul


spore shroom  
composed of living fungal matter.
scatters spores when exposed to soul
when focusing soul, emit a spore cloud that slowly damages enemies


thorns of agony  
senses the pain of its bearer and lashes out at the world around them
when taking damage, sprout thorny vines that damage nearby foes
thought to be created from the thorns and vines that you find it surrounded by.
section: created by event/emotion
these are emotional events that do not have to do with death

grubberfly’s elegy  
contains the gratitude of grubs who will move to the next stage of their lives.
imbues weapons with a holy strength.
when the bearer is at full health, they will fire beams of white-hot energy from their nail
created from “gratitude.” 
the “holy strength” that it imbues in weapons is odd, but there are many things that are called “holy"
it is in the kingsoul description.
the shell of the pure vessel.
jiji calls the resting grounds a “holy place of repose.”
so i do not know how to interpret it.
however, the word “elegy” gives the idea that the grubfather is dying so the grubs may move to their “next stage of life.”

grubsong  
contains the gratitude of freed grubs
gain soul when taking damage.
also created from the gratitude of grubs.
kingsoul  
holy charm symbolising a union between higher beings.
the bearer will slowly absorb the limitless soul contained within
opens the way to a birthplace
this only symbolises the event of the white lady’s and pale king’s union.
given that they are who you get the charm from.
we assume that this was by accident because we do not have a reason for it to be needed to be created.
quick slash  
born from imperfect, discarded nails that have fused together.
the nails still long to be wielded
allows the bearer to slash much more rapidly with their nail
created from the nails’ wills.
where the will inside the nails comes from is unknown, either, perhaps it was from the ancient nailsmith that you see residing over this charm.
but considering the nails were discarded i do not think that the nailsmith intended to create this charm, as such we say the emotion and not the bug created this charm.
spell twister  
reflecting the desires of the soul sanctum for mastery over soul, it improves the bearer's ability to cast spells
reduces the soul cost of casting spells
created from the “desires of the soul sanctum” which means there was not a willful effort to create the charm.
and that it was a byproduct of their experiments and emotions.
void heart
an emptiness that was hidden within, now unconstrained.
unifies the void under the bearer's will
this charm is a part of its bearer and can not be unequipped
you quite literally play through the creation of this charm from the event of you remembering your past with the kingsoul equipped.
we do not think that the white lady knew that this was contained within the kingsoul when she wondered what was at “the heart of it” 

section: unknown
these are the charms where we dunno how they were formed.
a lot of these will have no additional information unless we are unsure of placement.
gathering swarm  
a swarm will follow the bearer and gather up any loose geo
useful for those who can't bear to leave anything behind, no matter how insignificant


lifeblood core  
contains a living core that bleeds precious lifeblood
when resting, the bearer will gain a coating of lifeblood that protects from a large amount of damage
(suggestion: may have been created by the abyss creature, since this charm is found in the same room the creature is present in next to the abyss; and considering that said creature is also present in the lifeblood dreamcatcher room within godhome.)
lifeblood heart  
contains a living core that seeps precious lifeblood
when resting, the bearer will gain a coating of lifeblood that protects from a modest amount of damage

longnail  
increases the range of the bearer's nail, allowing them to strike foes from further away.
quick focus  
a charm containing a crystal lens
increases the speed of focusing soul, allowing the bearer to heal damage faster
could be formed naturally, but the outside casing of what looks to be metal would mean that a bug created this, or is this the same material that is on deep focus?
shaman stone  
said to contain the knowledge of past generations of shaman
increases the power of spells, dealing more damage to foes
it is unknown if the “knowledge” was used to create this charm intentionally, or if it caused the charm to be formed unintentionally.
stalwart shell  
builds resilience.
when recovering from damage, the bearer will remain invulnerable for longer
makes it easier to escape from dangerous situations

steady body  
keeps its bearer from recoiling backwards when they strike an enemy with a nail.
allows one to stay steady and keep attacking

wayward compass  
whispers its location to the bearer whenever a map is open, allowing wanderers to pinpoint their current location.
