grubs
any player of hollow knight likely knows these cute and cuddly creatures, due to their memorable sounds and design.
grubs function as a sort of quest system relying on pure player instinct to attack the jar and free them, and return to grubhome[1], to get rewarded, all without any text encouraging it ingame.
however, on the lore side of things, a darker tone is revealed, and this document will cover that.
note: the grub care instructions will be used, and would be placed in a semi-canon state where any information that is not contradicted by ingame evidence will be acknowledged as supporting evidence.
the collector
the first thing to be addressed regarding grubs is the collector.
the collector is the entity responsible for capturing the grubs, considering it is the one who mapped out where the grubs are[2], and the fact that the hunter's journal states the following: "preserves hallownest's creatures in glass jars with particular attention given to grubs."
a common misconception regarding the collector's motives is that the king ordered it to collect the grubs, considering it is a void entity with a strong resemblance to the kingsmoulds.
however, when we consider the dream nail dialogue of the husk dandy[3] holding the key to the tower of love, the collector "became as one" with the husk dandy, presumably due to the latter imprinting on it which is why the void heart doesn't pacify it, as it cannot pacify imprinted void beings.
due to the collector being imprinted with the husk dandy's mind and/or will, it's original directives would no longer apply, and it choosing to capture grubs would be a result of the husk dandy imprinting upon it.
why capture grubs?
the next reasonable question would be why it gave "particular attention" to the grubs.
well, when we consult the grub care instructions, it would appear that grubs were kept as pets by the bugs of hallownest.
off the name alone, grub care instructions, and it's contents, it appears that they filled the role of hallownest's pets.
this is a much less solid source, but a tablet in the shrine of believers contains the following message: "nobody who steals our grubs shall live!
"[4] this tablet implies ownership of grubs, which is backed up by the grub care instructions, and the collector focusing on grubs after being imprinted by a member of hallownest's upper caste.
why are the grubs in jars?
the next questions would probably be the following: why keep your pets scattered across hallownest in jars?
how do you catch one?
well luckily, both of these can be answered!
for starters, jars are used to catch the grubs, when we consider the grub care instructions, and a prop found throughout the tower of love, with one hung in the "study" of the tower where the collector's map is found.
the grub care instructions state the following: "grubs like to squeeze themselves into tight spaces, but will panic if they get themselves stuck.
if you have lost your grub, try leaving out an open jar or other container with food inside.
the grub will often creep in and can be found happily tucked inside."
(normal tablet and edited one to remove noise)
   
what can be concluded from these two pieces of evidence is that the jars are used to catch grubs, and this also explains why we find other creatures in jars inside the tower of love like aspids or vengeflies; the bait lured them in and then they got trapped.
this also would explain why grub mimics can be found in jars, they intentionally enter the traps to ambush those who are trying to get their pet grub back if it was lost.
this is supported by the hunter's journal entry for grub mimics: "luring an enemy close by pretending to be a weak little grub.
very cunning!
unfortunately for them, i eat these grubs as soon as i see them."
why doesn't the collector take the grubs?
the next question to be addressed is the following: why does the collector just leave the grubs trapped and not at least take more than 3 back to the tower?
if the collector's dream nail dialogue is examined, it appears to believe that it is saving the grubs and that the jars are a "safe space"[5].
the hall of gods statue also calls it a "joyful god of protection" further evidencing it thinking it is protecting them by leaving them in the jars.
as for them being scattered across hallownest, many of the grubs are actually stashed in secret or hard to reach areas, it's plausible that the collector placed them there after trapping them to further protect them, and if someone were to raid the tower of love, they wouldn't be able to take and harm all of the grubs it believes it is protecting, hence it is actually logical to scatter them.
furthermore, if the grubs were hidden away by the collector, it would mean the captured grub mimics would be intentionally placed as well, as extra security against any adventurers seeking to "harm" the grubs.
traits of grubs
while grubs may appear fairly weak, they actually have some fairly interesting abilities.
for starters, their gratitude is able to form charms as evidenced by grubsong which "contains the gratitude of freed grubs."
and grubberfly's elegy which "contains the gratitude of grubs who will move to the next stage of their lives."
grubsong which generates soul from the user being hit can have it's soul generation abilities increased by grubberfly's elegy as well.
the grub care instructions also mention this: "when grubs are overcome with feelings of gratitude, they may sing softly to their adopted parent.
there are old snail-tales about the song having invigorating or restorative powers, but this has never been proven by learned bugs."
grubsong quite obviously represents the grubs’ song, and considering soul is the life force that animates bugs[6], the "snail-tales" seem to have merit.
what’s even more interesting is that snail shamans are snails who made use of soul, and possibly knew of the grubs’ capabilities if they are the ones behind the "snail-tales" yet the soul scholars who are presumably the "learned bugs" never figured it out.
and as for physical aspects, according to the grub care instructions, grubs grow quickly and are voracious eaters that will happily eat anything.
they also have been shown to burrow through the rock that composes hallownest’s terrain, and possess powerful instincts that will guide the grub back to the place it hatched.
furthermore, the wanderer's journal states that grubs are highly skilled tunnelers, and that they have an excellent sense of direction on page 26.
grubs also display some fairly interesting quirks, starting off with the grub care instructions, grubs long for company and become despondent if left in isolation due to being raised with their siblings in nature.
they also love to be pet by other creatures, gain "unseemly appetites" if fed flesh or eggs, and according to page 27 of the wanderer's journal, "grubs are known to collect shiny things and hide them in their burrows" to the point that ellina says "there's likely a literal mountain of geo hidden away inside the grubs' home."
grubberflies
   the final part of this document will be addressing the next stage of the grubs' lives, metamorphosis.
a somewhat common misconception is that grubfather is "evil" and ate the grubs.
however, this is easily disproved by grubberfly's elegy, the charm received at 46 grubs.
it states the following: "contains the gratitude of grubs who will move to the next stage of their lives.
imbues weapons with a holy strength."
this states that it is grubs (plural) who will move onto the next stage in their life, not a singular grub (the grubfather).
in addition, an achievement called metamorphosis is obtained.
this, coupled with the fact that they are all seemingly inside grubfather once you leave and return suggests that the grubs move onto the next stage of their lives by using grubfather as a living cocoon to undergo metamorphosis and become a grubberfly.
