1.
hornet is biologically born to herrah, and there is no evidence that she has void within her like the vessels have.
2.
the vessels are born in the abyss.
hornet says that she is not born there, which makes her different from her siblings.
3.
hornet explains that she can’t enter the temple of the black egg for long because only vessels are not drained by its bindings.
the main difference between a vessel and a regular bug is that vessels have void inside them.
4.
hornet says that she does not have the “crucial emptiness” that the knight has.
this emptiness refers to the void.
5.
the death animation in silksong as well as hornet’s low health particles indicate that she has no shade and no void inside her.

1.
hornet is biologically born to herrah 


hornet is biologically born.
no reference is made to her being “created” like a wingmould or kingsmould, nor is there any evidence of her being created with void.
she is the biological daughter of the pale king and herrah, which is directly said by the white lady when she speaks to the knight about hornet.
she says that hornet is a:


“striking reflection of her mother” 


this means that hornet looks similar to her mother’s appearance.
note that the white lady is talking about hornet’s physical appearance, as she only went blind with time, and was able to see before.
she says this herself when the knight visits her with defender’s crest equipped:


“time has clouded my eyes and i cannot see much”


about hornet, the white lady says that she:


“never begrudged the wyrm's dalliance as bargain.” 


the oxford living dictionaries defines dalliance as: 


“a casual romantic or sexual relationship.” 


in plain words, the white lady never cared that the pale king (wyrm) had a sexual relationship with hornet’s mother.
we know that herrah did not have a romantic relationship with the pale king, as deepnest did not accept his rule, nor is there any evidence of them both being romantically involved.
furthermore, the white lady is specifically talking about hornet’s origins in that conversation, and it would not fit the context if she suddenly started to discuss how her husband had a romantic relationship with somebody else.
there is one detail about this line that is often overlooked.
the white lady specifically says that “the wyrm's dalliance” was the bargain here.
the pale king obviously had this dalliance with herrah in order to conceive a child with her, but the child itself, hornet, was not the specific bargain here.
the bargain, or deal, was that the pale king would have sex with herrah in return for her becoming a dreamer.
once again, this would result in a child, which was herrah’s intention, but the child was not directly what the pale king offered.
just to be very clear here: the pale king offered herrah a sexual encounter in order to produce a child.
he specifically made a deal with herrah that they would have sex which would result in a child for her, and in return, herrah would become a dreamer.
the deal was not that the pale king would create hornet and then give her to herrah.
in summary, what we can learn from the white lady’s lines is that the way hornet was born was through a sexual relationship that herrah had with the pale king, that hornet looks similar to her mother in appearance, and that hornet herself was not technically part of the agreement that herrah had with the pale king.
the dalliance could result in any child, not hornet in particular.
the midwife in deepnest also says that hornet was a:


“pale gift to the nest and the beast”


note that hornet was not a literal gift of the pale king to herrah.
hornet was born through a dalliance, and this dalliance was the original offer.
the midwife presumably calls her a “pale gift” because hornet’s biological father is the pale king.
some further evidence that hornet is the daughter of herrah is in herrah’s dreamnail dialogue: 


“...bound...
for brood... for child..."


hornet herself also calls herrah her mother after the knight kills herrah:


“we do not choose our mothers, or the circumstance into which we are born.” 


note that she says “born” here, not created.
the white lady similarly says:


“i feel some affection for the creature birthed.”


from this evidence, it can be learned that hornet was born to herrah and the pale king and that she is their biological daughter.
there does not seem to be any reference to her being created or filled with void.
2.
hornet was not born in the abyss


some people argue that hornet was made or born in the same way as the vessels were.
however, this is not true when we examine hornet’s dialogue.
in the abyss, the first thing that hornet says to the knight is:


“ghost.
i see you've faced the place of your birth, and now drape yourself in the substance of its shadow.”


“your birth”, meaning that she, unlike the knight, was not born in the abyss.
we also know that the vessels are born in the abyss, because the kingsoul’s description states that it: 


        “opens the way to a birthplace” 


if hornet is not born in the abyss, then she cannot possibly be formed in the same way as a vessel is.
it is true that void constructs are made in white palace, but since we know that hornet is born (see point 1), and she was not born in the abyss, it is unlikely that she has void within her like the vessels have.
3.
only vessels do not get drained in black egg temple


when the knight arrives at the temple of the black egg after obtaining void heart, they can have a final conversation with hornet.
she tells them that:
        
“i won't be joining you in this.
that space is built to sustain your likes.
its bindings would drain me were i to join.”         


what could she mean by “your likes”?
there is only one thing she could refer to here.
the temple of the black egg was built for the hollow knight, who is a vessel.
we know that vessels’ main difference from regular bugs is that they have a shade (made of void) within their shell.
therefore, it can be assumed that anyone who does not have that would be drained by the temple’s bindings.
this can be seen happening to hornet when she helps the knight by holding down the hollow knight with her needle and thread.
she can only hold on for a short time before she is thrown off and immediately falls unconscious.
this further supports the notion that hornet is different from her vessel siblings, as the temple of the black egg’s bindings do not drain the knight or the hollow knight, but they do drain her.

4.
hornet says she does not have void inside her unlike the knight


when the knight gets the king’s brand, they can travel down to the abyss to retrieve the shade cloak.
as they climb back up again, hornet is present at the entrance of the abyss.
she has some very interesting expositional dialogue here, but her words are often not fully understood.
in particular the following line:


“though our strength is born of similar source, that part of you, that crucial emptiness, i do not share.” 


the “crucial emptiness”, what could that mean?
what is regularly believed is that hornet refers here to the knight being “hollow”, or empty of emotion and thought.
after all, this is crucial for a vessel in order to contain the radiance for eternity.
but if that were true, then her next line would not be logical at all:


“funny then, that such darkness gives me hope.
within it, i see the chance of change.”


she says this directly after talking about the crucial emptiness of the knight.
why would she be referring to the hollowness of the knight as “such darkness”?
instead, this sentence, and in fact, the whole conversation, makes more sense if “crucial emptiness” instead refers to the void that is inside the knight.
this is not the only place where the void is called “emptiness”.
there are several references to this throughout the game.
when the knight returns to the white lady with void heart, she describes that charm as:


“that pulsing emptiness...”


and also the void heart description says:


“an emptiness that was hidden within, now unconstrained.”


void heart only allows its bearer to unify the void, so the “emptiness” that both the white lady and the description talk about has to be referring to the void.
furthermore, the hunter's journal description of the sibling describes the abyss as:


“far down below us, beneath the kingdom, the air grows stiller and a sense of emptiness pervades.”


this implies that “emptiness” is a quality associated with the void.
therefore, any references to “emptiness” would have to be referring to the void, not any state of “hollowness”.
hornet’s sentence in the abyss can instead be explained more accurately in the following way.
she is alluding to the fact that both she and the knight share a parent (the pale king) when she says that: 


“though our strength is born of similar source” 


but she explains that she does not have void inside of her when she adds: 


        “that part of you, that crucial emptiness, i do not share.”


why is the void inside a vessel crucial?
only a void being has the capability of sealing the radiance for some time, and most importantly, only a void being can directly oppose the radiance with the united void behind them.
hornet even has dreamnail dialogue in the abyss where she mentions uniting the void:


“...it faced the void, and ascends unscathed... could it unite such vast darkness?...” 


note that she calls the void “darkness” here, just as she does in her regular dialogue in the sentence after she talks about the void as being “crucial emptiness”.
on reddit, a user named harvestman-man explained the underlying grammatical structure of these sentences: 


“the word “that” in [“that crucial emptiness i do not share”] is a demonstrative determiner that refers back to the previous sentence:


“ghost.
i see you’ve faced the place of your birth, and now drape yourself in the substance of its shadow.”


it’s not just any part of you, not just any crucial emptiness, it’s that crucial emptiness- specifically, the crucial emptiness she already mentioned- the crucial emptiness that comes from the “place of your birth” and the “substance of its shadow”.
it’s really just a question of understanding english grammar.
the next sentence is:


“funny then, that such darkness gives me hope.
within it, i see the chance of change.”


this sentence really only makes sense if the “crucial emptiness” she refers to in the previous sentence is, in fact, darkness, because darkness is the subject of this sentence.
otherwise, what “darkness” is she talking about here?
you have to treat her entire spiel as a unit- this whole misinterpretation of what she’s saying comes from people looking at individual words and phrases and completely ignoring the context within which those words and phrases were said.” (source)


consequently, hornet says in the abyss explicitly that she does not have the void inside her that the knight does have.

5.
silksong death animation shows that hornet has no shade


the sequel to hollow knight, hollow knight: silksong, features hornet as the playable character.
consequently, she has a unique death animation and low health particles that clearly indicate that she is not a void being.
when the knight in hollow knight dies, their body disintegrates, black particles explode from them, and their shade is released.
their shade can be seen right before the screen turns black:
  
  



this is all in line with what we know about the knight, since the knight is a confirmed being of the void, was born in the abyss, and was specifically born there in order to have a shade.
[1] 


so what does hornet’s death animation look like?
surely, if she were a void being too, she would have a shade as well, and would also emit black particles before dying?
however, this is not the case.
when hornet dies, soul and silk explode out of her:
  
  

the screen then turns black starting from hornet’s body and exploding outwards:
  

there are some people who say that this means that hornet explodes into void, which really does not make any sense.
nothing like this happens with the knight or pure vessel, both confirmed void beings.
it also makes no sense to assume that hornet’s body would be made of void simply because it is black, since other non-void characters such as eternal emilitia, lurien the watcher, grimm, and elderbug also have this black body.
furthermore, this would mean having to ignore all the other evidence that was listed above.
this effect for hornet in silksong is more likely simply a screen transition.
upon returning to the place of her death, there will be a silk cocoon that hornet can strike in order to gain a full thread spool:


  



there is no shade for hornet like for the knight.
this fact alone should be more than enough to conclude that hornet is not a void being.



there is even more evidence in silksong that indicates that hornet is not a void being.
hornet’s particles and hud animation when on low health are different from the knight’s.
when the knight is on low health, void particles emit from them, and the last remaining mask on the hud will have void particles floating off it:
  

hornet has soul coloured particles, since she has no void within her:
  

conclusion


based on the evidence presented above, it can be understood that hornet is not made of void.
she explicitly states in the abyss she does not have the emptiness that the knight has.
this emptiness can be assumed to be the void, as there are many other references that also refer to void as “emptiness.''
furthermore, since hornet was biologically born, and she was not born in the abyss, she is different from her vessel siblings (who we know are made of void).
it is also said by hornet that only “your likes” can enter the temple of the black egg without being drained.
this likely refers to the vessels, whose main difference from a regular bug is that they have void inside them.
this means that hornet does not have this void.
lastly, hornet’s death animation in silksong clearly shows that she does not have a shade nor does she emit void particles when at low health like the knight.
the principle of occam’s razor prescribes that when formulating any theory, one must not make any unnecessary assumptions.
taking all of the above-mentioned evidence into account, the simplest explanation is that hornet is not made of void.
