kingsoul & void heart analysis




  







the kingsoul is a “holy” charm containing “limitless soul” obtained by combining the two white fragments.
these are given to the knight by the white lady and taken from the corpse of the pale king respectively.
its description reads: “holy charm symbolising a union between higher beings.”.
from the locations where the halves are acquired it can be interpreted that the higher beings referenced are indeed the pale king and white lady.
if the knight takes the charm to the abyss, it can access the birthplace.
here, upon dream-nailing its own reflection and remembering its past, the charm transforms into the void heart.
the significance of kingsoul
  

how kingsoul may have been created
“ahh!
so it bears our once-fractured soul, now complete.
such strength, such resolve, such dedication!
is it more than simply a vessel?
i almost feel like i'm once again in the presence of my beloved wyrm.
the kingsoul... what is at the heart of it i wonder?
if its curiosity wills it, it should seek out that place.
that place where it was born, where it died, where it began…”
- white lady


it is generally unclear whether the kingsoul charm was created intentionally, and this is ultimately not a very important consideration.
however, it is certain from the above dialogue that even white lady herself does not know what the charm contains.
white lady also says that the charm was at one point whole, before being split between her and the pale king and being reformed once more by the knight.
the dialogue which plays upon obtaining the white fragment from the white palace may give us another clue.
it appears as though this line is being narrated by the pale king himself:


  



this is likely to be a description of vessels themselves, who, being derived from the pale king and white lady’s biological offspring, are literally born from the “soul”, or lifeforce of wyrm (pale king) and root (white lady).
this is exhibited in their pale outer shells, which grant them the ability to focus.
“heart of void” most likely refers to the vessels’ inner shades.
also of note is the similarity between this quote and “born of god and void” (birthplace pale king dialogue).
based on the above, it is possible to infer that the kingsoul charm came into existence as a product of the “union” which led to the vessels’ creation.
regarding kingsoul’s purpose
upon first encountering her, white lady tells the knight that she has been awaiting a vessel.
she gives it the white fragment, claiming that she had held it in hopes of said vessel finding her:
“oh!
one arrives.
far it walks to find me.
did it seek my aid?
or did the path carry it by chance to so pertinent a place?
it is true.
true, that you were awaited.
no.
perhaps that is inaccurate.
true one like you was awaited.
i have a gift, held long for one of your kind.
half of a whole.
when united, great power is granted, and on the path ahead, great power it will need.”                                                                                         - white lady
she mentions that the charm contains great power, which the knight will need on “the path ahead”.
when speaking to her again, white lady makes her intentions clear:
“i implore you, usurp the vessel.” - from this we can deduce that white lady has awaited a vessel for it to replace the hollow knight.
the reason she gives the knight the white fragment is so that it may gain the strength necessary to do so.
however, when the knight returns with the fully completed charm, she says the following: “is it more than simply a vessel?
i almost feel like i'm once again in the presence of my beloved wyrm.
the kingsoul... what is at the heart of it i wonder?
if its curiosity wills it, it should seek out that place.
that place where it was born, where it died, where it began…”
white lady praises the knight for having completed the charm, and despite not knowing what it contains, encourages it to seek out the birthplace.
it is unclear why she directs the knight to do so, as nothing indicates that she no longer wants it to replace the hollow knight.
in any case, following her instructions leads the knight to the birthplace, where it may use the dream nail on its own reflection and access its own memory.
in this sequence, we see the events which occured before the start of the game, when the pale king chose the hollow knight to serve as the chosen vessel and locked the remaining vessels in the abyss.
it is then that the kingsoul charm is transformed into void heart.
the knight’s transformation through void heart                                                        
   the characteristics of the “lord of shades”
“an emptiness that was hidden within, now unconstrained.
unifies the void under the bearer's will.
this charm is a part of its bearer and can not be unequipped.”                                                                                                                                         - void heart charm description.
the void heart charm is incredibly powerful, and allows the knight to unify the void.
this causes a substantial change in the knight, which bardoon senses.
he says the knight “evolves beyond that wyrm” (pale king) and can “maybe challenge nature” (the radiance).
the knight is explicitly stated to have attained a level of power greater than the pale king (a higher being) and it is viable for it to destroy the radiance (another higher being) while in such a state.
a higher being is defined as “existing above all others” (team cherry ama).
it logically follows, therefore, that the knight (or lord of shades) is now a higher being by proxy, since it exists “above” two known higher beings.
the “emptiness” which is “now unconstrained” likely refers to the knight’s inner void, or shade, which, until this point, was being suppressed by the shell.
something that also merits mentioning is that the idea of the shade being “hidden” by shell is further corroborated by mask maker’s dream nail dialogue, which is as follows:


  



it should be noted that the siblings’ shades behave not like vessels, but more like void tendrils (natural void).
post-void heart, the knight’s shade does not appear to have its behaviour altered in this way.
from this it can be interpreted that “unconstraining” in the context of the knight is mental as well as physical.
while the shell ordinarily represses the shade’s natural behaviour, once the knight’s shade is “unconstrained” through its acquisition of void heart, that is no longer the case.
this is proven by the fact that when the knight’s shell is destroyed in “dream no more”, the shade does not immediately return to the abyss, and the void remains united under its will.
another piece of evidence which supports the idea of the void heart charm being permanently linked to the knight’s shade comes from the second part of the void heart description: “this charm is a part of its bearer and cannot be unequipped”.
thus, the void remains united even after the knight’s shell is destroyed.
obtaining void heart causes siblings, void tendrils, and the knight’s shade to become passive.
having said that, interactions with the shade are unlikely to actually occur canonically because they require the knight to respawn at a bench (despite its shade visibly leaving its body and its shell being destroyed).
attaining void heart also causes the shade beast’s (bug who holds the bowl where the shade cloak is obtained) dream nail dialogue to change from: “void...power...
without unity” to “lord of shades…”.
this provides further evidence that the knight has indeed united the void and evolved past its original self.
how void heart is formed
  

the void heart charm is born from the kingsoul.
the knight witnesses their origin, and remembers that it, alongside its siblings, was abandoned by the pale king and left to die in the abyss.
it seems that the knight had previously lost this memory for one reason or another, and it is the revelation found within said memory which gives rise to the void heart charm.
this is insinuated by hornet’s dialogue in the abyss and the description of the ‘void’ achievement:


  

  







“to accept that void inside yourself” can be interpreted as the knight realising that they themselves are void at their core.
that sense of individuality is what distinguishes the knight from the other vessels, and enables it to unify the void under its will.
this also lines up with white lady’s dialogue when returning to her after obtaining the void heart charm.
she refers to a “pulsing emptiness” (void), and notes that the knight has been “transformed by the revelations it found”.
although the following is only speculation, it may be considered that kingsoul costs five notches to equip, and is therefore the ‘heaviest’ charm in the game, whereas void heart is ‘weightless’.
this can be taken to symbolise the figurative ‘weight’ of pale king and white lady’s regret in having conceived the vessels.
the knight is no longer being burdened with that ‘weight’ after it is able to come to terms with the conditions of its birth.
lastly, the animation which plays when the knight obtains void heart shows kingsoul ‘splitting open’ to reveal void heart inside.
it is possible that this is a symbolic representation of a vessel’s shell breaking open and revealing the shade inside, which as mentioned previously, the void heart charm can be said to represent.
on the fate of the pale beings


this next section will look at the fate of the pale beings and how this may relate to the kingsoul charm being split between them.
at some point the kingsoul charm was split in two, and each of the two beings who took part in the act of conceiving the vessels kept one half.
both the pale king and white lady felt great shame for having originated the vessels, and responded in different ways.
the white lady  




“do i seem prisoner here?
if so, it's not by any choice but my own.
these bindings about me, i've chosen to erect.
there is some shame i feel from my own part in the deed and this method guarantees it cease.
i still feel that urge you see.
i always will.
a voracious desire to spread seeds upon the land, to propagate myself, to breed.”                                                                                                                                           - white lady
from this quote, it is clear that white lady chose to bind herself in queen’s gardens in order to guarantee that she will no longer produce offspring.
the reason she does this is because she felt shame for having birthed the vessels with the pale king.
although she is unable to suppress her desire to propagate, her bindings nevertheless manage to prevent herself from doing so.
as mentioned earlier, white lady claims to have kept the kingsoul charm for all this time in order to give it to a vessel in the hopes that they will replace the hollow knight.
however, this may not be her only reason.
when the knight returns with the completed charm, she notes that it reminds her of her “beloved wyrm” (pale king).
assuming that the charm itself was formed by the act of “union” which conceived the vessels and given that the name “kingsoul '' seems to implicate her partner, it is understandable that she would remember him upon seeing it whole.
this is merely conjecture, but it is possible that the splitting of the charm not only represents the part played by either party, but also the disconnection between the pale king and white lady.
this separation probably occurred following the birth of the vessels, as white lady clearly says that the shame she felt for having done so is the reason why she isolates herself.
the pale king
  

“our pure vessel has ascended, beyond lies only the regret and refuse of its creation.
we shall enter that place no longer."
- abyss lore tablet


from the quote above, it is evident that the pale king felt regret due to having created the vessels.
this is corroborated by mask maker, who calls the vessels’ creation “wyrm’s great shame”.
after sacrificing everything in order to save his kingdom and realising it was all for naught, pale king departs to the dream realm, taking his palace with him.
we know this to have happened because most of the palace has completely vanished from its original location (ancient basin), and there are no signs of a struggle having taken place (according to relic seeker lemm: .
the nearby kingsmould has a seal on its mind which can only be penetrated with the awakened dream nail.
doing so allows the knight to enter the white palace, which we can confirm to be real due to the fact that dying there is counted as a “real” death (it ends steel soul).
we also find within it the pale king’s corpse and white fragment.
what is especially interesting is that unlike white lady, pale king does not seem to have ever intended for his white fragment to have been obtained by a vessel.
he instead chooses to isolate himself behind a magical seal, in the metaphysical world of dreams, at the heart of a palace filled with lethal obstacles.
one way of interpreting this is as the grieving pale king’s inability to come to terms with his regrets for having originated the vessels (which are represented by the kingsoul charm).
those regrets, having remained on his conscience, continued eating away at him until his eventual demise (paralleled by the charm remaining on his person).
it is also worth mentioning that the “limitless soul” contained within the kingsoul charm can be taken to represent the “limitless” children of pale king and white lady who perished in the abyss.
when void entered their eggs and destroyed their insides.
the original children were killed, those insides having been replaced with a “heart of void”, or shade.
conclusion


  



the kingsoul charm is an enigma, but given the circumstances of its creation and the method by which it is transformed into void heart, the most logical conclusion is that it is indeed an abstract representation of vessels themselves.
to summarise, it is a charm which was likely created as a by-product of the vessels’ conception, which the pale beings do not seem to understand that which exists at the heart of.
the charm evidently encompasses the regret associated with the “union” that led to the vessels’ creation, and it opens the way to where those vessels were born.
upon coming to terms with those regrets, the charm is transformed into void heart.
this in turn represents the unification of the void under the knight’s will as well as the acceptance of the “emptiness” that exists within it, the void itself.
