masks of hallownest

it is often assumed that most bugs in hallownest are wearing masks.
however, there are very few bugs who can be confirmed as wearing a mask.
the mask maker in deepnest addresses this issue too: 


  



the following is a short analysis on who is surely wearing a mask, and who is not.
mask wearers 
mask maker
mask maker is definitely wearing a mask, because it can be removed when the knight uses desolate dive or descending dark.
they also comment on this mask themselves: 

  quirrel 
quirrel does not directly wear a mask himself, but he wears monomon’s mask on his head.
hornet says it is a mask in the quirrel comic:


   


the dreamers
since monomon wears a mask it can be assumed that herrah and lurien are wearing masks as well, as their masks have a similar appearance.
the wanderer’s journal also says that the dreamers including monomon wear masks.



battle obbles
strangely enough, the face armour of the battle obbles is referred to in their hunter’s journal entry as a mask:  


  



heavy fools
similarly to the battle obbles, heavy fools’ armour is also called a mask:
  
  















brumm/nymm
brumm wears a mask, which can be seen as he takes it off when he becomes nymm after the grimm troupe is banished.


the godseekers
godseeker, along with all the other godseekers in godhome, is wearing a mask.
she says this directly when the knight gives her a delicate flower in junk pit: 


  



this is also evident from the weathered mask hunter’s journal entry that the knight receives upon going to the land of storms after completing all pantheons with all bindings:  
  

 





the knight 
the knight wears an ancient mask, but their head itself is not a mask.
they collect shards of an ancient masks and use this mask to strengthen their shell, as is said in the inventory descriptions:
     




the ancient mask makes the knight’s shell more resilient and it shields their “true form beneath”, which could be either the knight’s actual shell or their shade.
at the start of the game the knight does not have a mask yet, with the inventory description for the mask being blank:
  

bugs without mask
most of the mindless creatures who have generic dream nail dialogue such as “...safe...dark…” and “...eat...when…”  are not wearing a mask.
the bugs who have this dream nail dialogue are feral and unintelligent, even before being infected.
examples of these are aspids, vengeflies, booflies, and gruzzers.
the following intelligent bugs are definitely not wearing masks either:
* mosskin
* mushrooms
* flukes
* bees
  
  
  
  




ambiguous cases


stalking devouts 
at first glance the stalking devouts appear to be wearing a large mask, but this is not the case.
their hunter’s journal description states:


  

  

their “mask” is part of their body, their foreclaws.
midwife
it looks like the midwife in deepnest is wearing a mask, since it slides out of the way when she starts to attack the knight.
although taking the stalking devouts into account, this could also be part of her body.


little weavers
the little weavers have the same line across their heads as the stalking devouts and midwife.
it might be possible that they are wearing a mask.
however, it is not confirmed that they actually are.
maskflies
while the word “mask” is in their name, the maskflies appear to be unintelligent bugs.
it is unlikely that somebody put a mask on their heads.
husks
  
  
  
  
  



husk’s white faces could be just part of their shell, as bugs outside hallownest similarly have a white head and darker body.
this can be seen clearly in the quirrel comic:


  



it seems that bugs having a white head and a darker body is part of the art style, it does not tell us anything about whether that bug is wearing a mask.
conclusion
it appears that most bugs in hallownest are not wearing a mask.
only the dreamers, mask maker, battle obbles, heavy fools, brumm, and the godseekers are definitely wearing a mask.
the knight has a mask too, although this mask is apparently not visible, and their head is just part of their shell.
for some other bugs it cannot be said with certainty that they are wearing a mask, such as the midwife or the little weavers.
