sapience (hollow knight)


sapience is defined as, essentially, wisdom.
it is what sets us apart from animals, and it is what sets some lucky bugs of hallownest apart from the less intelligent, animalistic bugs, such as crawlids and vengeflies.
there are multiple sources of sapience, from higher beings to bugs that are simply born with it, to foreign bugs that we can only guess about.
higher beings
higher beings are powerful beings in hallownest that are said to “exist above all others”, [1] and they are a prominent source of sapience.
when one of the wyrms traveled to hallownest and transformed into the pale king, he became a source for intelligence among most of its people.
the wyrm transformed


as stated in the poem elegy for hallownest by monomon the teacher, written about the pale king:


in wilds beyond they speak your name with reverence and regret,
for none could tame our savage souls yet you the challenge met, 
under palest watch, you taught, we changed, base instincts were redeemed,
 a world you gave to bug and beast as they had never dreamed.
the second line in particular implies that the bugs of hallownest were like animals, relying on their base instincts “savage souls” to survive.
the creation of hallownest “tamed their savage souls” because pk expanded their minds[2] and made them more intelligent in the process, so they could worship him.
actually, most higher beings in hallownest have the ability to instill a mind among their thrall.
unn, a higher being that resides in greenpath created the mosskin with intelligence, as shown in a hidden greenpath lore tablet.
[3]


  
  

             unn                                                                                            some of the mosskin


the nightmare’s heart, a higher being that resides in a part of the dream realm consisting of nightmares, created the grimmkin as well as troupe master grimm and the grimmchild, as stated by white lady when grimmchild is brought to her.
[4] it has created them with sentience in order to continue the ritual to keep itself alive.
the nightmare’s heart                                                        grimm            one of the grimmkin

as well as the radiance, the goddess of light, creating the moths, who worshipped her in turn, as stated by the seer, the last living moth.
[5]
  
  

                          radiance                                           some moth tribe members
sapient bugs of hallownest
there are instances of bugs with sapience that survived before pale king’s beacon and without another higher being.
the mantis tribe and the beasts of deepnest were there before the pale king, and had warred since ancient times, as referenced by the mantis lords’ hunter’s journal entry[6], page 60 of the wanderer’s journal book, and the mound of deepnest bug corpses outside their village.
the mantis tribe                           the spider tribe, some of the deepnest inhabitants


also, the ancient civilization existed long before pk, and they had enough sentience to worship the void, as relic seeker lemm states.
[7]  
different forms of the void idol, an item made by the ancient civilization to worship the void
not to mention that the ancient civilizations also made miraculous inventions such as soul totems[8], mask shards, soul vessels[9], and even void spells such as sharp shadow[10].
finally, the bees of the hive are not known to have received intelligence from pk, and they had a strong working society under their queen, vespa.
hive queen vespa                                                                           some of the bees


it is known that those bugs who were granted intelligence by the king and leave the kingdom lose that intelligence, as a lore tablet in the howling cliffs states, along with a corpse there.
the exact dialogue is “no king..no mind...release..” which implies that under the pale king’s beacon[11] they were granted “higher thought” so they could worship him.
sapient bugs from outside hallownest
however, there are even more instances of bugs possessing intelligence without a higher being.
a character named boon from the quirrel prequel comic wanders the wastes outside hallownest.
they aren't the most intelligent creature out there, as they speak in the third person and make sentences simplistically[12], but they aren't primal and certainly have sapience.
boon and quirrel sharing a meal
more examples of this are foreigners to hallownest, such as tiso, cloth, and zote.
tiso, cloth, and zote
we know that they came from another kingdom[13] [14] [15] and they all have sapience.
most foreign bugs have sapience, like cornifer[16] and iselda[17], who are intelligent enough to make and sell maps, and ze’mer, the grey mourner[18], who asks the knight to deliver a flower to her lover’s grave.
these actions imply decision making and communication and interaction skills, which are signs of sapience.
cornifer                                      iselda                                   ze’mer
in conclusion, sapience in bugs can come from higher beings, but it can also arise naturally in bugs even if a higher being is not involved.

