introduction
   spells in hollow knight are..self explanatory with the name, it appears arcane knowledge [1] is needed to turn the medium of choice into a spell.
the most common medium is soul, the lifeforce animating bugs [2], but other substances such as infection or void can be melded in, and the other known medium appears to be void.
common bugs are unable to use these arcane arts without severe consequences, such as disfiguration due to the misuse of soul [3][4], amnesia [5], severe headaches (caused due to limitations of the mind) [6][7], and feeling the souls of the bugs the soul originated from [8].
mediums for spells
   as mentioned previously, soul is quite acceptive of other mediums being melded in, and a few examples will be listed and shown with images:


soul scholars' homing spell blasts are shown to be orbs of soul infused with infection:
  

shadow spells (abyss shriek, descending dark, shade soul), dd and as descriptions say they are composed of soul and shadow [9], and the snail shaman says the knight melded it's essence into the spells [10].
we can conclude this means the knight infused it's void into the spells to turn them into the shadow spells.
as for void being a medium used in spells, as shown in the pure vessel fight which is the hollow knight at it's prime, before being sealed, it will use an attack where it thrusts it's nail into the ground and conjures giant nails made of soul.
we also see one of its arms light up and glow white when casting the dagger spell [11], and during the hollow knight fight, one of its arms is missing and it doesn't use any soul related abilities.
this appears to imply that arm was used for using spells with soul.
however during the hollow knight fight, the hollow knight performs the same move with thrusting it's nail into the ground, but rather than conjuring nails, bursts of infection and void intermingling erupt from the ground.
given the same execution and effects, this seems to imply it is the same spell but performed with the limited resources, those being infection and void which have both been shown to be able to be used in spells.
further, albeit weaker evidence, is the knight's shade also using learned spells, however, it would only have void to use and as such the spells like howling wraiths are all black.
the issue with this is that the knight never canonically interacts with its shade due to being dead for the shade to be released, which leaves the whole scenario dubious as to whether it is canon or not, and the shade using spells could merely be for added gameplay challenge, like it gaining more max hp as the knight gains more max hp of its own.
while on the topic of the hollow knigh and void spellst, it appears to also use a void spell which coats its shell in void to teleport, similar to how the knight coats itself in void to use the shadow dash.
another medium that ought to be mentioned is silk, rather, soul imbued silk.
it's a form of soul spells, sure, but it's silk fused with soul and in hornet's case, her silk and soul are "inseperably bound" [12], and the argument could be made that "gossamer storm" (the aoe attack with silk threads lashing about around her) is a spell.
the last possible medium would be essence.
the radiance conjures homing blasts of light that start forming from essence pooling together, and it acts quite similar to the soul scholars' blasts which are a spell, perhaps the spell they have is a result of being infected with the radiance's light, and being taught to use that technique but with soul and infection.
another possible spell made with essence would be the dreamshield.
the dreamshield is conjured by the charm [13], with conjuring typically being used in the sense of summoning something through magic.
we also know charms can contain spells because of sharp shadow saying it contains a forbidden spell [14], so dreamshield could possibly have a spell contained within which is what conjures the shield.
seals
   something that ought to be mentioned is seals are commonly referred to as spells, in both midwife's dialogue, and the godseeker prayer to the pure vessel.
lets start off with midwife, when you have weaversong equipped, she says this: "amazing things the weavers once crafted on their looms; stories, shields, spells.
so much of our history was spun upon their spools.
your little friends there are testament to their talents...
heehee."[15].
so the weavers could create stories, shields, spells, and charms (weaversong).
however, we see a partially completed seal of binding in their den, what category would it fall under?
not a story, obviously.
it could be considered a shield, maybe, but the prayer to the vessel also calls the seals  over the hollow knight a spell.
"bound by chain and egg and spell," [16]


   this line is describing what is containing the hollow knight, bound by chain and egg are self explanatory, it's the egg trapping it and the chains suspending it.
the spell part is interesting, though, as we only see a few seals.
the one in the door which the dreamer masks are on seems to just be included with the egg part, and the bindings that drain hornet don't seem to affect the hollow knight, or the knight.
what is left?
the seal of binding over the entrance once the fight begins, and the seals over the chains and the hollow knight.
given how it says "bound", it seems to refer to the latter, as it is what is restraining the hollow knight, but it would likely be grouped in with the chain part.
the seal of binding is the last seal left, and considering how we also see one in the weaver's den, it would seem it is categorized as a spell, or even seals in general are a subset of spells, which could make sense considering how most react to soul.
shadow spells
   the last topic in this document will be the shadow spells, and little quirks with them.
first thing addressed will be the point from earlier, shadow spells are a mix of "soul and shadow" with "shadow" commonly used to refer to void.
this has led many to use that as proof of shamans being void, however the snail shaman states that the knight warped and twisted the spell, and transformed it in a unique, expressive way by melding it's void into the spell [10].
moving on.
one of the main details noticed is that the spell upgraded is linked to the desires and emotions of the shaman.
the crystallized mound shaman wants to be freed as it's dream nail dialogue is "...free...me…" and it's body allows the knight to meld it's void into desolate dive, the spell that can break rock (and thus be able to free the shaman).
the abyss shriek shrine has this for dream nail dialogue: "...our voices... will cry out... again..." when a voice related spell (in the knight's instance, howling wraiths) is used, the room pours void into the knight and that enables the knight to meld it's void into the wraiths spell.
as for the shaman that gives shade soul, it's implied to be the shaman's third uncle who had a "ferocious temper" who had desolate dive and had the spell forcefully taken by soul master.
a ferocious temper plus being restrained and likely experimented on?
it would be reasonable that the shaman was vengeful, and would affect the spell related to vengeance, the vengeful spirit.
abyss shriek is a bit more interesting than just that, though.
to obtain it, void pours into the room and infuses into the knight, and there could be a few ways to see this.
one would be that the knight is melding that void into the wraiths and not its own, but it is a bit far-fetched to think that the void sourced from that shrine would be kept seperate just for using abyss shriek.
another explanation would be that the void was imprinted with the voices and desires of the ac bugs, as a form of long term storage.
when absorbed, the knight obtains this and can create abyss shriek.
another quirk involving abyss shriek is how spells like desolate dive become all black, but abyss shriek still retains some soul wraiths.
vengeful spirit
   going off on a side tangent, it's curious how vengeful spirit and shade soul burn enemies [17] and their corpses are all black afterwards.
no eyes also manifests vengeful spirit esque "ghosts" who all resemble her, and the kickstarter for the dream warriors/characters (such as no eyes) calls them spirits or ghosts [18].
not sure what this one is implying but it probably should've been mentioned.
conclusion
   so in a summary, most spells are composed of soul and can be augmented by melding in void or infection, although some could be composed of essence.
seals also appear to be a type of spell when examining dialogue about seals, and the shadow spells' creation seems linked to desires/emotions.
