in this post, i’m going to present evidence for the theory that hallownest was placed in stasis by the pale king.
i will also go over the plan to create the “enlightened vessel”.
thoughts?
reach me at @mossbag69, u/mossbag, or mossbag#0563


as long as the radiance is sealed within the hollow knight, hallownest is kept in eternal stasis.
king’s pass tablet:


bear witness to the last and only civilisation, the eternal kingdom.
hallownest


this tablet was likely written before the outbreak of the infection, but it establishes how important the idea of the eternal kingdom was to the pale king.
it was the moniker of hallownest.
wp workshop tablet:


void, yours is the power opposed.
but yours is potential, eternity potential, force that could deny time.
void, harness shall be placed upon you.
by using the void, the pale king hoped to achieve an eternal stasis, forever keeping the radiance at bay.
wp throne room tablet:


eternity in promise and charge in progeny cursed.
the pale king’s child, the hollow knight was forced to take on the infection, granting hallownest the chance to last eternal.
statues of hollow knight and dreamers:


memorial to the hollow knight.
in its black egg, far above.
through its sacrifice hallownest lasts eternal.
by sealing the radiance inside of the hollow knight, the pale king has been able to stop the inevitable destruction of his kingdom.
through their devotion, hallownest lasts eternal.
the statue for the dreamers in the resting grounds echo this.
hornet:


it's no surprise then you've managed to reach the heart of this world.
in so doing, you shall know the sacrifice that keeps it standing.
if, knowing that truth, you'd still attempt a role in hallownest's perpetuation, seek the grave in ash and the mark it would grant to one like you.
hornet confirms that the sacrifice of the hollow knight is what has allowed hallownest to still exist.
vespa:


though this hive exists within hallownest, we play no part in its attempt at perpetuation.
perpetuation is “the continuation or preservation of a situation, idea, etc.”.
this attempt at perpetuation was the creation of the hollow knight and the sealing of the radiance.
mask maker:

now this kingdom's stasis becomes the wyrm's legacy.
though the pale king is either gone or dead, his kingdom has continued to exist perpetually.
his scheme has allowed his kingdom to “deny time”.
seer:


though you may fall, your will shall carry you forward.
a dream is endless, but a kingdom is not.
the power to wake this world from its slumber... you only need to reach out and take it.
the world is in a slumber because nothing is changing.
radiance:


dawn shall break


hallownest has been frozen in one long night.
this better contextualizes the radiance’s dream nail dialogue.
once the radiance is free, dawn breaks and the long night will end.
quirrel:


  



quirrel calls hallownest the eternal kingdom.
dev notes:


no specific time is ever perceptible.
enforces the idea of a world in stasis.
"an age ago" is oka


today">no days.
its one long night


on top of all of that, we also have specific notes from the developers that confirm the theory that hallownest is in a sort of stasis.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


the vessel (and possibly the temple of the black egg) are what is keeping the radiance at bay.
the dreamers themselves are only used to provide a physical barrier to defend it.
to protect the vessel, the dreamers lay sleeping.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


aside from the plan to put hallownest into stasis, there is another plan playing out during the game.
it is hard to say whether this plan was intended from the start, or was conceived after the stasis plan was put into effect.
hornet, white lady, seer and possibly others are all trying to find a vessel that can obtain the void heart and become the “enlightened vessel”.
this name comes from some of monomon’s cut dialogue.
the goal of this vessel is to defeat the radiance and end the stasis over hallownest.
there is plenty of evidence to support the idea that the dream no more ending was planned before the game started.
white lady


the white lady is waiting for a vessel to find her.
she explains that she is waiting not for the knight specifically, but any vessel that can reach her.
oh!
one arrives.
far it walks to find me.
did it seek my aid?
or did the path carry it by chance to so pertinant a place?
it is true.
true, that you were awaited.
no.
perhaps that is inaccurate.
true one like you was awaited.
the white lady is waiting for a vessel so that she can give it her half of the kingsoul, a charm used to reach the dream no more ending.
she also pushes the knight to travel to the abyss to retrieve the void heart.
the kingsoul... what is at the heart of it i wonder?
if its curiosity wills it, it should seek out that place.
that place where it was born, where it died, where it began...


after acquiring the void heart, the white lady understands that the knight now has the power to end the stasis over hallownest.
the fate of our kingdom, our hallownest... that future belongs to you now.
there is one line of dialogue from the white lady that seems to counter this argument.
i implore you, usurp the vessel.
its supposed strength was ill-judged.
it was tarnished by an idea instilled.
but you.
you are free of such blemishes.
you could contain that thing inside.
this implies that the white lady only wants the knight to usurp and replace the hollow knight.
i don’t think this dialogue is very conclusive on what the white lady exactly means, and given her other dialogue and actions, i’d still argue that she is at least involved with a plan to enlighten the knight.
seer


seer is waiting for the wielder to arrive, so she can help it awaken the dream nail.
you've certainly made my dreary work here more exciting.
being the caretaker of this place hasn't been very stimulating.
i shouldn't complain though.
tending these graves and guiding the wielder... all penitence for old crimes.
certain things have to be kept in balance.
the old crime likely refers to how the moths forgot the radiance.
this incurred the radiance’s wrath on hallownest.
it seems like destroying the radiance, and wiping out the moth race is what needs to happen in order to keep something in balance.
after awakening the dream nail, seer tells the knight that her promise is fulfilled.
hah.
do as you wish, my promise is fulfilled.
may the crimes of my tribe be washed away in time, like the rest of this kingdom's…


seer made a promise to someone to guide the knight towards awakening the dream nail.
by doing so, the crimes of her tribe seem to be absolved.
hornet


hornet is the protector of hallownest.
she confronts quirrel when he first arrives in hallownest, and she appears to have slain a vessel in greenpath.
hornet’s main goal appears to be guarding the king’s brand, waiting to find a vessel strong enough to complete the task.
midwife confirms her duty.
then you've met her perhaps?
her who'd guard the mark, the gendered child.
hornet tries to destroy the knight during the first encounter in greenpath.
i know what you are.
i know what you'd try to do.
i can't allow it...
i think hornet understands that the vessels are trying to replace the hollow knight, and she cannot allow a weakling to do so.
hornet later realizes that the knight is different from the other vessels because it left hallownest.
i'm normally quite perceptive.
you i underestimated, though i've since guessed the truth.
you've seen beyond this kingdom's bounds.
yours is resilience born of two voids.
hornet guides the knight to kingdom’s edge and grants it access to the mark after proving its strength.
show me you can accept this kingdom's past and claim responsibility for its future.
the white lady, seer and hornet are all pushing the knight towards enlightenment.
the question is, who’s plan was it?
it most likely originated from hallownest’s rulers, the pale king and the white lady.
while the white lady’s involvement in the plan is obvious, the pale king’s involvement is a bit harder to place.
i think it’s possible that the pale king was not aware of the plan at all.
the pale king’s final dialogue is a reference to the actions he took to save his kingdom.
he sacrificed his children in an attempt to prolong the duration of his kingdom.
...no cost too great...
in the fungal core there is corpse that says the following line:


pale wyrm...what good to foresee a demise unavoidable?
if this mushroom accurately represents what the pale king knew, then the pale king was unaware of any solution to completely stop the radiance.
from the game’s instruction manual, we know that that the pale king went into hiding during the fall of hallownest.
as hallownest fell to ruin, its reclusive king abandoned his subjects and went into hiding.
whispers told that the most devout followers could still seek the king, though the journey was perilous beyond imagining.
it’s possible that this plan was conceived after the disappearance of the king.
but there are too many unknowns to say for sure.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


hallownest’s fate is left in the hands of the knight.
it will either continue the perpetuation of the stasis, or face the cause of the infection head on.
hornet:


i'd urge you to take that harder path, but what end may come, the decision rests with you.
hallownest’s fate will be decided by the knight.
do it!
make your choice.
my thread will only hold so long.
prolong our world's stasis or face the heart of its infection.
defeating the hollow knight will prolong the stasis, while defeating the radiance will cure the kingdom of its infection.
bardoon:


tiny thing... oh hmm...
the mark of wyrm you bear.
is it change you seek?
or to save this ruin?
“change” is referring to the changing the of the sealed vessel from the hollow knight to the knight.
saving the ruin refers to saving hallownest from the arrival of the radiance.
white lady:


the fate of our kingdom, our hallownest... that future belongs to you now.
white lady is relinquishing the fate of hallownest to the knight.
vespa:


to rail against nature is folly.
all things must accept an end.
vespa tells the knight that it is impossible fight against “nature”.
moss prophet:


light is life, beaming, pure, brilliant.
to stifle that light is to suppress nature.
nature suppressed distorts, plagues us.
embrace light!
achieve union!
oohh..ahhh.
from this dialogue, we can see that nature is represented by the radiance.
bardoon:


ohhhmmmm...
tiny thing...
it evolves beyond that wyrm.
such union in a single being.
a strength before unseen.
would it too challenge nature?
it could perhaps defeat it.
once the knight has the void heart, bardoon mentions that the knight could defeat nature, or defeat the radiance.
monomon: 


...a world forever unchanging...
...the seals, must break...


monomon independently realizes that the stasis over hallownest is not a good solution.
it seems possible that she called quirrel back to help the knight break the seals.
but we can tell that she didn’t want the knight to just replace the hollow knight.
she wanted the stasis to end.
