the stages of infection

keep in mind that the speed of the stages and effects can vary between bugs.
some stages are seemingly skipped all-together for some.
stage 1: trance and wandering:
“this old village.
what a strange dream, to have led me down here!
if you hadn't found me, i don't think i would've ever woken.” -sly 
the bug becomes delirious.
the eyes sometimes noticeably glow orange.
occasionally wanders far from its home [1].
can sometimes be snapped out of it early in the process like with sly and bretta.
this is when the infected bug begins to see or hear the radiance in their dream.
myla is ordered by the radiance to kill the knight [2].
the radiance has been known to coax bugs under her control and trick them into embracing the infection using their desires [3].
late into this stage the bug experiences increased hostility, likely due to radiance’s direct influence.
stage 2: beyond repair
“the bugs of hallownest were twisted out of shape by that ancient sickness.
first they fell into deep slumber, then they awoke with broken minds, and then their bodies started to deform....”- violent husk journal entry
the innards of the body seemingly become replaced or at least heavily damaged by the infection.
the bug becomes extremely hostile and seemingly receives a boost in physical capability [4].
the dream nail dialogue of some of these creatures shows reduced mental capability and simpler thought [5].
the physical body can become deformed at this point.
bloating and disfiguration is common.
stage 3: volatile cysts and painful deaths
“...blazing...bright…”- moss prophet (dead, dream nailed)
the bug becomes nothing more than a violent, instinctual, mindless beast.
cysts often grow on the body.
explosions upon death and/or contact is common, as seen with furious vengeflies and volatile gruzzers.
bugs at this stage of infection will often charge at the knight without hesitation or concern for personal safety, evident in the behavior of the violent husk, which will explode on contact with anything it charges in to.
the thoughts of the bug read by the dream nail are in all capital letters [6], a usual depiction of the radiance’s thoughts and words, which implies that radiance is now in total control.
the very latest of these stages completely kills the bug.
corpses of tuk and moss prophet show the cysts having overcome them.
unconventional infection:
  
  

broken vessel was not infected through dreams.
it is simply an empty shell that lightseeds filled up and are controlling it from the inside [7].
same applies to the watcher knights whose empty shells are being reanimated by infected flies [8].
the hollow knight only displays infected qualities due to containing the radiance within itself [9].
the radiance is not in complete control in this example as the hollow knight can momentarily take control to stab itself and assist the knight.
