the dream realm
(some things in this doc need revision)
(if you have any inquiries or objections to this lore document, @ me on discord @knightmere#3365.)
introduction
     in hollow knight, aside from the waking world, there exists another plain of existence known as the dream realm.
in this realm there originates the higher beings.
this realm is very old and seems to precede the events of hollow knight longer than most things or perhaps is the longest, which would make it the oldest ‘thing’ in the game’s lore.
dreams in general in the lore are very vague, they are linked to one’s mind and thought.
dream essence is the very lifeforce of this realm and its higher beings, with them having a distinct colour depending on the domain of the higher being you’re in.
this essence is very powerful as it can mould life itself, and when one dies, it appears that for their soul to pass on they must pass on their essence in some form (made apparent because of the multiple ghosts and dream warriors found in hallownest) more on this to come.
dream nail                                                              dream wielder        




  



moths and the radiance  
   at some point in the far past, the radiance who was currently ruler of hallownest, created a race known as moths in her image, who had somehow descended from the dream realm onto the waking world, we know this as we see seer give us the dream nail in the resting grounds after being knocked out by the dreamers in her dream form.
atop the crystal peak, the moths built a statue of the radiance, they had also constructed a weapon (most likely made of pure essence) known as the dream nail.
this weapon was capable of “cutting the veil between dreams and the waking”.
we are able to use this weapon to access the dream realm, but also look into the minds of bugs.
when the pale wyrm arrived he somehow convinced them to seal their master away by forgetting her, as it seems remembering a higher being in the dream realm is what powers/sustains them.
with her disciples betraying her to let a new monarch’s kingdom flourish, the radiance became furious and began appearing in bugs’ minds and dreams and exerting her influence as she was not completely forgotten (likely due to bugs finding her statue).
the memory/power of the radiance was resisted by the king and the bugs of hallownest and her hate began to manifest as the infection.
the radiance’s sealing was attempted by the pale king once more, this time in the form of the vessels.
seer and essence  
   the seer being the last of her tribe, was given a special shield forged of essence for her being ‘she was their last’.
by the time we meet her in hollow knight, she is old and helps guide the knight in the path of reawakening the dream nail, as over time it had dulled.
even after awakening the dream nail, we collect more essence and eventually we had enough for seer to ascend.
she finally found the wielder that their tribe looked for, and had undone the wrongs her tribe committed.
seer then dispersed into essence wishing for us to forget her and her tribe.
the importance of this encounter proves that the beings of the dream realm (at least the ones created by higher beings) are made of essence.
further evidence for this are the many ghosts that have trouble passing on in hallownest, this includes the dream warriors.
suggesting a reason for their failure to pass on may be that their will had not given up?
nonetheless these ghosts also disperse into essence upon being struck with the dream nail or their last words had been said.
seer also teaches us about whispering roots, they are apparently the manifestation of where bugs’ dreams take root.
perhaps this can also be a result of when a bug dies, (be it a collective thought or singular) their thoughts take root, similar to how when bugs died some of them chose to become charms, however this is just speculation.
the nightmare realm  
   long ago at some point in the distant past, the dream realm was split in two for an unspecified reason, now having the existence of the nightmare realm and the nightmare’s heart.
this realm poses some sort of antithesis of some sort to the dream realm, not at war but not allied to the dream realm.
here in the nightmare realm, there exists twisted nightmares instead of regular ghosts that you would see made out of dream essence.
rather than that dream essence in this plain, it is scarlet red.
the ghosts who we know as grimmkin serve the nightmare’s heart and by extension grimm.
it is unknown why they do so, perhaps out of requirement to exist, or some reason they may benefit from it.
i take a more extensive look at the grimm troupe in general here.
unn and greenpath     
   unn is a massive slug like higher being who is responsible for the creation of greenpath and all life that lives in it.
her essence seems to be a lime green colour like her mosskin.
we know unn is responsible for all of this from evidence in the game such as lore tablets stating her mind moulding the caverns and shrubbery to her desire.
when we meet unn in the game she utters no words and gives you the shape of unn charm.
there is speculation that unn has grown weak since the radiance has infected her mosskin and are straying their worship , they also seem to not associate with the pale king as read from the lore tablet at the entrance to queen’s gardens from greenpath, “though once our lands, a pale being lays claim to the caverns ahead.
it may appear benevolent but it does not share our dream.” more on unn can be found here.
lifeblood   
   lifeblood is a light blue substance that we find throughout the game.
lifeblood was apparently looked upon as taboo as remarked by salubra, but also makes you feel stronger.
within the abyss, there could be found an altar where the player requires many lifeblood masks to enter.
upon entering, you are taken into this partially waking and dreaming state (which mola refers to as a ‘daydream’ and i shall refer to it as such as well).
in this plain you are still grounded by the waking except dream essence and clouds are present.
at the end of this maze you find a big open area with a pedestal that has the lifeblood core charm on it.
hidden away is this room is a massive lifeblood creature that may or may not be responsible for this daydream.
joni the heretic gives the joni’s blessing charm upon her resting place.
this charm converts your lifeforce to lifeblood and thus halting your ability to focus soul.
perhaps this is why it was regarded as taboo.

   in godhome (which is in the dream realm) there is a locked door that can only be opened via bindings.
this door contains blue essence connected to vines.
when struck with the dream nail the vines sprout all across godhome into the respective pantheons for collection and use there.
in this same room hidden in the shadows we also find the aforementioned lifeblood creature.
overall lifeblood remains quite vague in hollow knight and it seems to be exiled from other dream related things.
because of its presence in the abyss perhaps it could have a connection to the ancient civilization?.
you can learn more about it here.
the godseekers     
   in hollow knight’s godmaster content pack we were introduced to the godseekers.
these beings are in constant search for the god of gods.
they possess the power to attune to beings, giving them power.
in godhome, the essence colour is bright gold and the main activity that happens here is attuning beings through combat.
the godseekers possess the will and power through their collective mind to restore beings to their full power because of the aforementioned attuning.
in the pantheon of hallownest, we get small scenes of godseeker checking upon the higher beings that you do not come in contact with during the pantheon, and eventually at the peak of the pantheon, they attune the radiance to her pure and absolute form.
this is important because they were able to bridge the radiance from inside of the hollow knight to godhome for us to challenge her at her prime believing that she is the god of gods.
this is further proof of what strong minds are capable of doing.
after defeating the absolute radiance, the knight becomes focused enough and then unifies the void,  amassing into the true god of gods (which we refer to as ‘shadelord’).
alongside higher beings, the godseekers also attune to powerful creatures that we faced throughout the game, at least bringing memories/dreams of them to the dream realm for a battle.
you can learn more about the godseekers here.
the pale king  
   the pale wyrm had descended (perhaps from the dream realm) upon hallownest and shed his form to become the pale king.
he convinced the moth tribe to turn their backs on their leader in favour of him with the idea of sealing away the radiance and usurping her kingdom.
alongside most architecture in hallownest, he is also responsible for the creation of the vessels and the white palace.
when we visit the palace grounds in the game, it seems to have blinked out of existence, but when striking the remaining shell of a kingsmould with the awakened dream nail, we are presented with a grand memory of the palace.
we cannot enter the memory with our dulled dream nail because there is a very strong seal of binding protecting the corpse of the kingsmould.
the pale king’s supposed corpse is found within this memory, so we can assume he retreated here and took his palace with him.
if this assumption is true then the pale king must have been a very powerful being, with the ability to move a structure as grand as the palace into the dream realm and seal it away.
godseeker also remarks upon him in the pantheon of hallownest, stating how even though he was gone, his lingering power alone brought them to hallownest.
he was also able to transport the radiance into the hollow knight and place seals of binding  around his restraints, even going as far as to even seal the entrance (also aided by the dreamers).
in this white palace, the sky is a very light blue and the essence colour is white.
many more of his kingsmoulds can be found here alongside his royal retainers.
what is also special of this memory is that there are soul totems of the white lady and the hollow knight found here, giving plentiful and infinite soul respectively, but the the hollow knight totems can only be found in a secret part of the palace with yet another seal of binding preserving a memory.
this memory is of both him and the young the hollow knight sharing a moment.
we can infer that he sealed this away because it was important to him.
the white lady    
   the white lady was the queen of hallownest mated to the pale king, she is also referred to as the root.
in the game, we see her reside in her gardens but she is bounded.
reasoning for this was her shame as she was part of the creation of the vessels, who she acknowledges as her spawn.
it should also be noted that she is the only other character who is referred to be ‘pale’.
the kingsoul charm is a symbol of her union with the pale king.
she is the only higher being that we do not know if she originated from the dream realm or not.
perhaps we can make an inference since the rest of them are from the dream realm, and also the fact that godseeker remarks about her absence from the attunement as we gaze upon her unbound.
the dreamers    
   the dreamers are 3 characters who were voluntarily put into an endless sleep by the pale king in hopes of preserving the hollow knight by their combined power of their minds.
since the knight needed to break the seals to enter the black egg temple, they confronted them to do so via the dream nail.
what is important here is that they themselves are catalysts to seal the temple.
even though their physical bodies are dormant, they try to hinder the knight twice during their journey, first in greenpath right after defeating hornet by knocking them out, and the other in resting grounds, trapping them in an old memory there.
the dreamers have their own separate dream spaces, resembling the radiance’s arena.
power of the mind  
   as we have discussed previously, sheer will is powerful enough to manipulate thought and dreams.
good examples of this are the multiple npcs in hollow knight who repel/acknowledge they are being dream nailed.
these characters include seer, bardoon, white lady, midwife, and snail shaman.
seer for example actively addresses that you are poking around in her head and informs you that there is nothing there worth our time.
examples of the power of the mind follow.
the radiance carried the power to take control of bugs’ bodies and minds by just spreading her influence and visiting bugs in their dreams.
the most likely reason the mantis tribe were not infected was because of their etiquette, will and pride.
even the reward for defeating their lords reflects this in its name, the mark of pride.
they most likely denied the radiance of her power because of their standard.
unn also ‘willed’ greenpath and her mosskin into existence, alongside the dreamers who with their minds alone hindered the knight through their journey.
the godseekers use their collective conscience to attune to beings and directly steeping their power.
the pale king gifting the bugs of hallownest the ability to think was one of his biggest downfalls, as this gave the radiance an opportunity to instill ideas into them, as he supposedly instilled ideas into the hollow knight as well.
whether the vessels already had minds at birth or not, a fault in their creation was the fact that their objective was to seal the radiance, but them having an objective by itself means they need to think to accomplish their goal.
the real irony in the king’s plan was that in the 2 endings of hollow knight that we are certain the radiance is dead, the knight uses their will to unite the void and defeats her.
