introduction
   the hunter is a skeletal, large character who provides the hunter's journal, the encyclopedia of the game's enemies that provides insight into the world of hallownest, and it's creatures.
now, it's somewhat debatable to his origins, with some even believing he originated from deepnest.
however, many things point to him being a foreigner instead, and this doc will cover that.
with this out of the way, time for the actual writing.
debunking the deepnest theory
   to address the deepnest theory, while the hunter does mention living in a "nest"[1], this does not pertain to deepnest specifically.
the only other evidence is that the hunter has 6 eyes.
however, this does not tie him to deepnest, as ancient bugs like the corpse in the queen's gardens also has 6 eyes, and is completely unrelated to deepnest.
the hunter's body shape also does not match up with the beasts, or spiders of deepnest.
if he was from deepnest, and clearly wasn't a beast as he has intelligence, why would he go on to attack hornet, the princess of deepnest?
[2] the hunter has no idea who she is, either.
additionally he calls the corpse creepers the "the beasts of this land"[3] as if he was a foreign explorer, not a native of deepnest, if he was native to deepnest he would likely just say "the beasts of my home".
this line "the deepnest is a dangerous place to hunt, but rewarding.
"[4] also seems to go against him being native to deepnest.
all in all, nothing truly connects him to deepnest, and his actions and manner of speech towards it only deconfirm it further.
debunking the hunter being remnants of the ac/void
   another misconception i've seen brought up is that the hunter is related to the ancient civilization due to his limbs having detailed jointing and a skeletal appearance like them.
however, this is quickly debunked when you compare the two known ancient civilization members' traits, and his.
both the bug with the shade cloak bowl, and the ancient nailsmith have a large plated shell upon their backs with a ridge in the middle, and have detailed, jointed limbs.
however, the hunter does not have this massive shell they have, rather having a..spine?
so while he does have similar limbs to the shade cloak bug, nothing else ties him to the ancient civilization and he is missing that large shell.
in addition, for the void tendril entry (which is just his musings) he states that "the bugs of hallownest sometimes wondered whether there were other, older, stranger kingdoms deep below them.
what strange fancies they had.
"[5] if he was truly of the ancient civilization, why would he think of it as just a strange thought they had?
the ancient civilization is an older, stranger kingdom deep below them, so his lime alludes to this, yet he seems clueless about it.
he also says he has no tribe of his own[6], so if he was part of the ancient civilization, he wouldn't say such a thing.
another misconception brought up is that the hunter is related to void given focus (also dubbed the shade lord) due to the eyes and limbs, but there really isn't much behind it.
the hunter doesn't even have as many eyes as it, and the only thing tying the hunter to it is white eyes, but that is just a technique of showing eyes in darkness, tiso also has his eyes obscured by the darkness of his hood, so they're white.
oddly, ellina says the hunter's eyes glow, but i don't think that points to him being void.
we don't even see a normal void being capable of speech outside of odd swooshing noises (shades), and the vgfocus's roar.
the collector is an exception due to it's circumstances with becoming as one with the love key bug.
the radiance had also tried to infect the hunter, and he felt the allure of its power[7], something a void being likely wouldn't do (although he did stave off that desire).
and before you say broken vessel, the shade inside it aka the void had left and returned to the abyss.
the hollow knight is a special circumstance, as it is directly holding the heart of the infection.
as for the hands argument, bugs like quirrel have those hands too.
why the hunter is foreign to hallownest
   another idea brought up is that the hunter is native to hallownest, possibly due to his entry on baldurs[8].
however, the phrasing makes me believe that baldurs are more of a common bug across hollow knight's world, somewhat like how you can find something like a squirrel all across the world.
the idea of a common beast being exclusive to hallownest's area is..possible, but given the hunter's dialogue about hallownest's residents, he appears to be a foreigner.
first off, every time when he is referring to hallownest's citizens, he says "the bugs of hallownest" as if he was an outside presence peering in, this is just a few samples [5][9][10].
this figure of speech isn't only used by him, before quirrel regains his memories and realizes he once lived in hallownest, and his purpose, he also uses the terminology of an outsider, "the bugs of hallownest"[11].
furthermore, when the hunter is describing hallownest as a region, he talks of it like a new land full of new discoveries and not a place he has lived in for his whole life when talking about fungoons[12].
but the most damning evidence that he is a foreigner, is his dialogue for the hunter's mark.
he says, "i'm only biding time a moment, before next my hunt begins.
a true hunter has no home, no kingdom and i'm eager for new prey."[13].
this dialogue implies he is somewhat nomadic, he travels kingdoms to hunt their residents and once he seeks out new prey, he leaves for the next.
interesting journal entries for funsies


* the hunter had a tamed beast like god tamer's but killed it when testing its strength
some hunters train beasts to join them in chasing down prey.
i tried it once, but couldn't resist the urge to test my companion's strength against mine.
(god tamer entry)


* the hunter has no cares about honour, and at times views loyalty as something oppressive
fighting for 'honour', or for 'loyalty'... you may as well be fighting for dust.
if you want to kill, do it for your own sake.
that is the nature of a true hunter.
(dung defender entry)
some creatures are born with duties and loyalties marked indelibly upon their minds.
they are strong, but they are also slaves.
(hive knight entry)


* gulka info?
its leaves are dry and bland.
the bud is unpleasantly sour, but oh!
the venom in those balls it spits.
exquisite!
if you have the time to spare, try drinking some and enjoy the effects.
(gulka entry)
