the snail shamans
the snail shamans are one of the many groups found in hallownest, and by far one of the most mysterious.
in this document, all information known about them will be compiled, and their origins will be speculated about.
1.
the snail shaman
this is the only shaman that’s still alive when the events of the game occur, and is therefore the main source of information about the snails that we have.
he lives in the ancestral mound, and even is so kind as to give the main character (from now on being referred to as ghost) their first spell.
however, he had second intentions when he did such a thing, forcing ghost to kill an elder baldur within the mound.
this is,however, quite odd at first glance, since he clearly has the ability of using the vengeful spirit himself,so why rely on ghost?
well, this might have something to do with the charm that can be found right after killing the baldur: soul catcher.
according to its description, the charm is utilized by the shamans to draw soul (the resource that animates the bodies of bugs and powers the spells used) from the world around them, which leads me to believe that since the shaman does not have the charm with him, he’s unable to get the soul needed to use the vengeful spirit himself.
after we defeat the elder baldur, the gate that locked us inside the mound opens, and ghost is free to continue on its quest.
we are capable of returning to the ancestral mound, where the shaman can give us some information about the different spells that we obtain, as well as about the shamans themselves.
2.
overgrown shaman
  

this shaman can be found inside the overgrown mound, a sub area inside the fog canyon.
the mound, as the name implies, has become overgrown with vegetation, something that somehow happened to the shaman herself.
near her body, the howling wraiths spell can be found, which the living shaman confirms is of her making.
she’s described as not being usually generous, but had a beautiful voice (which is most likely how her spell came to be).
her dream nail dialogue implies that her dying wish was to be heard again, which might be why her spell can be found in the open, to allow her voice to live on.
“...hear...me…”






              








3.
sanctum shaman
  

this snail can be found behind the elegant key door, guarded by a soul warrior.
he seems to have been experimented on by the sanctum, and explodes into black particles upon being inspected, granting ghost the upgraded version of the vengeful spirit, the shade soul.
the living shaman does not tell us his relation with this shaman upon returning to him with the shade soul, but the missing piece in this puzzle might come from the soul master: the desolate dive.
the living shaman mentions that his third uncle had a similar ability to the dive, which could mean that the shaman found in the sanctum is the uncle, who had his signature spell taken by the soul master.
side note: the fact that the shaman combines with ghost to create the shade soul might have something to do with the vengeful spirit: if spells are born due to the emotions and desires of the shamans, the vengeful spirit could have been born out of a desire to kill the elder baldur and take back the ancestral mound.
similarly, the shaman could have merged with the vengeful spirit out of a desire to get revenge against the soul sanctum.
this is not confirmed in any way nor supported by any in game references, but it is interesting in a narrative sense.
take this as head canon material.
4.
crystal shaman  
found in the crystallized mound, this shaman somehow became trapped inside a crystal,  which might be related to the peculiar growth of the crystals and how they interact with living beings.
after breaking the crystal, the snail explodes into black particles, much like the sanctum snail, and is absorbed by ghost, granting it the descending dark, the upgrade of the desolate dive.
this is the fourth aunt of the living shaman, and after returning to him he comments on how he’s bound to the ancestral mound, something that will be addressed when discussing the nature of the snails.
.
“...free...me…”
































   5.
resting shaman
this snail resides in the resting grounds, inside a snail shell shaped tomb, implying that a proper burial happened.
this is the only shaman whose relation with the living shaman is unknown and cannot be inferred, which implies that they have died a long time ago.
in their tomb, the soul eater charm can be found, which was used to take soul from creatures while they were still alive, greatly boosting the amount gained, something that was most likely frowned upon due to actively harming other bugs, and the charm’s forgotten status might reflect that.
“...let me rest…”














   6.
the abilities of the snails
as shown previously, the snails are an extremely capable tribe, having many varied abilities.
the most notable one is their capability of soul manipulation, allowing them to create many varied spells, something that very few bugs in hallownest are capable of doing.
the living shaman is also capable of noticing the use of the dream nail on him, though the importance of this fact is up for interpretation.
another point worth noting is their prowess in charm making, doing so as to increase the effectiveness of their spell casting, be it with more power or a higher frequency of casting with a higher soul absorption.
the whispering root inside the ancestral mound also references a “spiral focus”, which could simply reference the abilities of the snails of focusing soul, or could be a unique brand of spell making and casting that the shamans have developed, something that might be the reason behind the difference between the spells cast by ghost and the pure vessel during its fight.
notice the more refined way that the floor nails appear in the pure vessel fight, almost as if they are actually made of metal, while the vengeful spirit has a much more blob-like appearance, as if the soul was barely changed, only shaped into the projectile.
7.
the nature of the snails
even after everything listed so far in this document, the true nature of the snail shamans still remains a mystery, including their ties to the ancient civilization and how exactly are they bound to their mounds.
the latter one can be more easily explained: they aren’t physically bound to their mounds, at least not forever.
the reason[a] i have come to this conclusion are the sanctum shaman and the resting shaman, because both of these snails aren’t found in a mound.
so, with this in mind, we can infer that snails can at the very least be taken out of their mounds, either by force (in the case of the sanctum) or after death (as seen with the resting shaman).
as for their ties to the ancient civilization (ac) , not much is known, however the ancestral mound has a considerable amount of  ac architecture, as we can see behind the whispering root in the mound and in some parts of the floor, heavily implying that the mounds were created by the ac.
the soul totem found inside is also decorated, presumably by the shaman himself, which could show either reverence/worship of the ac, or simply respect for a good source of soul.
the design on the shell of the sanctum snail also has striking similarity to the ancient masks, which were created by the ancient civilization, though it might be unrelated.
8.
are the snails void?
it’s time to address the elephant in the room: do the snails have any relation to the void?
before initiating speculation, we should lay out all arguments that support and that go against said notion:


-> arguments for the snails being void
-both the sanctum shaman and the crystal shaman explode into black particles upon closer contact, which are absorbed by ghost (which momentarily takes the shape of its shade).
-the living shaman calls ghost a shadow, an adjective that is commonly associated directly with void ( the void spells,sharp shadow, the shade cloak, hornet and the dreamers use the term shadow to refer to the void or ghost itself(which is made of void), and the shadow creepers seem to have some connection to the substance).
-the overgrown shaman appears to have melted in the place where her face was, and it’s possible to see some moss inside the shell that is still colored, so it is most likely not simply shadowed out moss.
-they seem to have some connection with the ancient civilization, which is known to have worshipped the void.
-the room of the abyss shriek reacts to the use of the howling wraiths, which could have something to do with the spell being made by a shaman.
->arguments for the snails not being void:
-they have never visited the abyss, as shown when showing the living shaman the abyss shriek (“ wherever you draw this new power from, it's not a place my kind ever thought to look.”).
-the overgrown shaman seems to have plant life living directly off of her body.
-they have genders and can reproduce, as demonstrated when the living snail refers to both uncles and aunts, as well as using “her” when describing the overgrown shaman, while other void constructs are genderless and are most likely unable of reproduction.
-the only known void constructs have come from the pale king, be it the vessels or the kingsmoulds and wingsmoulds, whereas there is no evidence for the ac being capable of creating said constructs.
-the overgrown shaman still retains her body shape, even after death, while the kingsmoulds and the collector both dissipate into pools of void.
->my conclusions about the shamans
as you can see,it’s not easy to draw conclusions about the snails and the void, and either side has plenty of arguments to support it.
however, i believe that the snails are indeed void, and the main reason behind this is the “shunned power” mentioned by the ancestral mound’s whispering root.
this power, that appears to be separate from soul (which was already mentioned by the root), could very well be the void that the shamans are made of, a piece of information that was lost as the shamans spread out and stayed in their mounds; they have shunned such power by being unaware of it, and not using it in conjunction with their spells.
this, however, still does not explain how the shamans came to be, however it’s safe to say that they are not constructs of the ac, since the civilization worshipped the pure void and not any sort of construct or being.
this still does not answer how the snails came to be, and i’ve yet to come to any sort of conclusion : they could be naturally created void beings, that left the abyss long ago and spreaded out through the land(something i find highly unlikely) or members of the ac that were capable of obtaining a new form by fusing with the void, which is somewhat supported by them being bound to the mounds, which appear to be creations of the ac as well as the abyss shriek room reacting to a spell created by a shaman.
either way, the shamans are by far one of the most interesting groups found in hollow knight, and one that i hope we see more of in the future.
