unn: the greenmother
  



greenpath


in this section we will begin a discussion of who unn is from the text found around greenpath.
we will use the lore tablets and dreamnail dialogue to get a broad overview.
we will start with one of the lore tablets.
while this is not the first lore tablet you will, most likely, find in greenpath, it is one that allows us to begin with our discussion on unn.
this lore tablet reveals that the “greater mind” that dreamed all of greenpath in its current greeness, was unn.
which allows us to easily cement her as a higher being in hallownest.
our next tablet is also a quick read and analysis.
this is another thing common for higher beings, they create bugs, which end up worshipping their creators.
[2] these “green children” inhabited the land that unn had vegetated for them, and they stand there waiting for her to call for them.
the “green children” still wander these lands in the form of the greenkin[3].
we can see this in their dreamnail dialogue.
[4]
  

  
  





...unn calls...
our leaves wilt...
protect the road of unn...




from this dialogue we can confirm the identity of the greenkin.
but it also opens up a few questions:
1.
why is unn calling them now?
2.
what do they mean when they say that their leaves are wilting?
3.
and what is the “road of unn”?
the first question we shall set aside, as nothing in our current knowledge allows us to make more than a few guesses, we will return to this in the greenkin and higher beings section.
the third question we can use clues from before to infer that it is greenpath.
the second question is answered by another lore tablet.
this text informs us that the greenkin draw life from the plants that surround them and that as long as the plants are growing the greenkin survive.
so from the dialogue, “our leaves wilt,” it is assumed that whatever sustained the plant growth, and through that the mosskin, is not working anymore.
this entity is most likely unn, and her power is waning, or is it?
there was a lore tablet that was undiscovered until early 2019, and while we did have the text for it, we do not count cut dialogue as being lore accurate.
this happens to confirm what is speculated above.
not only is unn the entity that sustains the mosskin, but she is also now “hidden.” i would take this to mean a self-imposed hiding.
though this does also call into question the theory that unn’s power is waning/failing as suggested above.
perhaps it could have been her pulling her power out of greenpath.
for the purpose of narrative, we will discuss this at length later in the document.
what matters is that unn was at one point not sustaining greenpath, and based on the dreamnail dialogue of the mosskin, she still isn’t.
lake of unn  
the last section established that unn had created greenpath and the greenkin.
it also established that unn’s power was no longer supporting greenpath, and she had sent out calls to the greenkin.
in this section we will go further into discovering who unn is, and then finally interact with her.
this takes us to the title of the section, the lake of unn, a sub area of greenpath which hosts a shrine to unn, as well as a massive lake of acid.
the following images will show you the outside and inside of the shrine.
from these two images we can conclude that the shrine had fallen into disuse.
the cracks in the stone and the tilting of the statue of a slug reveal that this once beacon of worship has fallen.
the statue also gives us our first clue into who unn is.
we know that this shrine is dedicated to her through the location.
this statue gives us the inclination that unn took the form of a slug.
if it is your first time inside this shrine you will meet quirrel here resting.
his dialogue confirms what i have said with the two last images, but i will include it just so we also have some supporting text.
this gives us our next point of where to go, the lake itself where we will see a lovely greenkin, a moss knight.
this one will not attack you however, as it is busy starting across the lake in contemplation.
this moss knight happens to have a unique dreamnail text.
...she is calling... home so close...
this moss knight is in the same position as the knight in this picture.
which leads us to the conclusion that unn may be across the lake.
at this moment in time you, as a player, have a few options:
1.
you can jump into the lake and die horribly in acid.
2.
you can try to super dash across the lake, which will then make you hit a wall and die horribly in acid.
3.
you can not die horribly in acid by leaving and coming back with isma’s tear.
[5] if you choose this option the other two options do not cause you to die horribly in acid.
upon reaching the other side of the lake you will find a small cavern that opens up and goes deeper.
as you descend you will find small puddles of acid, until you fall into a large area at the bottom of the cave.
where you will meet unn.
[6]  






unn does not speak, she just throws you out of the acid that you fell into, then looks at you, before spitting out the charm:
shape of unn[7]
  



  

 




here we see the body of unn, which to no surprise is a slug.
she sadly has no dialogue and you are incapable of dreamnailing her, so the only piece of lore gained is what we can get from the surrounding and the charm she provided.
[8] we do not know what else unn does down here in her cave.
let’s do a recap of what we know:
* unn is a higher being who takes the form of a slug.
* she created the flora of greenpath.
* she created the greenkin, which take the form of plant-like bugs.
* the greenkin protect the “road of unn” which we believe to refer to greenpath.
* the greenkin listen to the “call of unn” but we do not know more about that.
* unn used to be worshiped, but that worship has long since ended.
* unn’s power is waning or being withheld from greenpath.
now, we haven’t been able to confirm exactly that her power is waning except through a single dreamnail dialogue.
luckily the godseeker, who has a self-explanatory name,[9] provides us with another piece of dialogue confirming her falling power.
we also learn that unn is spending her time sleeping.
which normally is not too important, but she did create greenpath from her dreams, what she is doing in her sleep is unknowable to us.
we also get a glimpse of her sleeping form in the distance.
unn and the world  
now we get into more theoretical subjects.
we will be determining the relationship between unn and the other higher beings.
which is somewhat covered by the remaining two lore tablets off greenpath, and the only lore tablet of the forgotten crossroads.
from what we can tell based on this, the pale king and unn had an agreement.
it would appear that during the rise of the pale king and hallownest, unn was still an active part in the greenkin’s lives.
this does not confirm any interaction between the two, but it does show that the pale king was powerful enough to go into the territory of unn and claim it.
it wasn’t completely annexed, and we know this because the greenkin were able to still enforce their rule on what was not part of the white king’s road.
there was one area that was annexed completely by hallownest.
in the final lore tablet of greenpath we read.
this lore tablet is found in the lower left part of greenpath, right before the entrance to queen’s garden.
the lore tablet is represented by the red dot.
furthermore, the pink dot is marking a whispering root.
...greenkin lost...
...paths overgrown... 
     ...dream forgotten...
these texts together have a few interpretations, but let us go line by line.
first with the lore tablet and then the whispering root.
the first line refers to the fact that the mosskin once inhabited and ruled over queen’s garden.
we know from the name as well as the presence of the white lady that she is the one who took the area from them
        the second part is telling of the relationship.
we can see that this appeared to have been on decent terms.
or perhaps the appearance of benevolence is referring to how the white lady takes on the appearance of a plant-like being.
i find the latter option to be more likely.
we still have not confirmed any agreement between unn and the royal couple.
the one thing that i can say supporting the notion that unn and the royals had direct interactions is that they would have known about unn due to the power she had.
now we can add the whispering root to this interpretation to see a full picture of what happened.
the first line is either a reference to the loss of the gardens, or perhaps to the loss the greenkin had when unn’s power faded.
i favor the latter here.
my reasoning being that unn does not seem to be very big on conflict.
given that when you do enter her home all she does is give you a charm then swim away, seems pretty telling of the atmosphere.
there is also the mosskin dreamnail dialogue which states that they are focused on the task “protect the road of unn.” which is distinctly non-hostile.
it is my theory that this whispering root is telling the beginning of unn’s fall.
the second line can further support this by referencing the overgrown paths, which could refer to the way larger flora found in queen’s garden[10], as well as the disrepair unn’s shrine has fallen into.
which will be shown below because it saves you the work of scrolling, and because i need to fit an image on this page somehow.
however i find an alternate interpretation more likely.
the third line i interpret to be directly related to the loss of land suffered by the greenkin.
the “dream forgotten” is unn’s dream that created the area as we know it.
this refers to how the queen’s garden had forgotten the image that unn had given it.
instead the area now owed allegiance to the white lady.
so now we have unn as the creator of not only greenpath, but also of queen’s garden.
i think that her power was falling before hallownest was founded because the greenkin lost all of the garden, and a large swath of greenpath, to the pilgrim’s way.
it seems infeasible that this would happen with permission from unn, especially given the lore tablet that says those who would stray from the path are subject to the “law of unn.”


further theories  
so now we get to have fun!
this is the place for theories that you probably can’t confirm.
some will be way more plausible than others however, and we will start with one that i find to be also very plausible.
please note that not all of these are my original thoughts and i cannot give credit to everyone who has spoken up about these theories in the past.
only the ones that people have privately told me their theory will be specifically given credit.
there are too many of you, but i can just say thank you to everyone in the #lore channel!
unn and fog canyon
this is a commonly thrown around theory that states:
        
the fog canyon was once a part of unn’s territory.
the evidence surrounding this theory is that the pilgrim’s way sign only mentions verdant paths and fungal groves, nothing about a pink foggy crevice.
you also can note that fog canyon is full of rich green plants, of which there are only two other areas, queen garden and greenpath.
[11]
it is also evident from the map.
how do you get to the queen’s garden?
there are five entrances:  
1 from greenpath that has been blocked off
2 in fog canyon, both blocked by acid and thorns
1 from the fungal wastes, but that one is behind a breakable wall past the moss prophet.
the last entrance is from deepnest, but that is at the very back and on a whole other side of the garden.
moving on from location, we can also see that not only does fog canyon share the same flora as greenpath, it also shares a common bug: charged lumaflies.
admittedly there are only 3 groups in greenpath, but they are also a good reason to put an electronic archive in an area, easy access to the source.
[12]   


so in short, fog canyon holds a similar flora to greenpath, and has thorns like greenpath and the gardens.
has 2 of the 5 entrances to the gardens, where the other three are each in their own area.
and they also are home to the same type of bug.
this, along with how fog canyon acts as a wedge between the two aforementioned areas, is why i believe that unn also held power over the fog canyon in the past.
there is one final piece of evidence brought to my attention by @molasses#0272, which is that when you listen to the music of fog canyon and compare it to the greenpath music you will find that the fog canyon music is just a slower version of greenpath music with added effects.
this is further compounded by the addition of the wanderer’s journal, a spin off book made in collaboration with team cherry that states:


“pockets of swirling gasses easily become trapped in bubbles, leading to interesting acoustic effects throughout the area.”


which could explain the shift in the music.
the journal also has this to say:

“some of the natural geological features of the area strongly resemble those in greenpath, suggesting the two regions might have been one at some point.”


which is pretty self explanatory.
small side note
a theory has been posited that the fungal wastes were also apart of unn’s realm:
        
“i[13] have one thing, that when plants die, they are often overtaken in fungi, such as the stereotypical fallen tree with mushrooms growing on them.
i wonder if some of the fungal wastes was once greenpath, but the wilting green was overtaken by the fungi.”


while i have nothing to disprove this theory, i also have nothing to prove it.
both whispering roots in the area do not talk about the wastes, but instead about mantis village and fog canyon.
[14] also the pilgrim’s way lore tablet talks about “verdant wilds and fungal groves” which implies unn’s territory and the mushroom’s territory.
alternate whispering root theory
there is also an alternate idea as to the interpretation of “dream forgotten.”
this is due to the mossy vagabonds.
[15] 
  

  











  

  



this hunter’s journal description, along with the dreamnail dialogue.
shows that
these mosskins have stopped listening to                              unn, and now listen to moss prophet,                ...so bright...our new path...
who is preaching for the radiance.
it is from these that you can draw the conclusion that the “dream forgotten” may refer to the radiance.
however, due to the little amount of reference to the radiance in other dream nail dialogues, unless we go back and reexamine what we know.
which we will do in our next section.
greenkin and higher beings
there is a theory that states:


greenkin may need a higher being to sustain them.
do you remember way back at the start, when we first looked at the dreamnail text for the mosskin and volatile mosskin?
...unn calls...
our leaves wilt...
protect the road of unn...


well i want to explore the second line a little bit more.
the leaves are wilting because unn is losing power, which causes the plants to die.
without unn all of greenpath would die, if the previous statements are true.
however we only say one sentence of the moss knight dreamnail text, here is the rest.
...new light, in our leaves...
...kill, for light...for unn...
...protect...destroy...
this text seems to imply that the infection from the radiance and the call of unn are at odds, with the call losing power, the light of the radiance seems to be the new sustainer of life in the greenpath.
even the line “new light, in our leaves” draws similarities to photosynthesis.
but how could unn be calling, if your leaves are wilting?
also the lines  “new light, in our leaves” and “...kill, for light...for unn…” are really quite dubious when examined next to each other.
unn is never referred to as a light, only the pale king and the radiance are.
this would imply that the radiance has infected greenpath and that all dreamnail dialogue referring to unn, is actually the greenkin not being able to tell the difference between unn and the radiance.
and that “dream forgotten” is actually the radiance causing them to forget the dream of unn.
while i do agree with the possibility of the greenkin mistaking the radiance for unn, it does not explain the moss knight on the dock of the lake.
nor does it work with the rest of the interpretation of the whispering root referring to queen’s garden.
unless it is just an issue of timeline.
isma
this is a theory about isma, one of the five great knights, that states: 


isma is related to unn and could be a greenkin.
first, we do already know from moss knights that greenkin do have the potential to wield nails and shells, as seen on the page above.
second, isma’s grove is the only part of hallownest that is green with plants, besides greenpath, queen’s garden, and fog canyon.
two of which we know were made by unn, and the other one has strong evidence for being made by unn.
now the foliage found in the grove is far different than anywhere else, which is a bad sign, but ze’mer is said to have hailed from a far away land, but the same is never said for isma.
third, isma’s tear, which allows you to swim in acid.
the first line is interesting because the blessing takes the form of a fruit.
while this could be due to how it grows from a plant, it also states that it is made from a tear, which plants don’t do.
also given how ogrim will recognize the blessing and say that she gave you it.
“she gave you her blessing”[16]
from this it seems that she had more than one to give, even when alive.
which if they are grown on a plant, and need a tear to form, it would make sense that a bug-plant species was what made it, and those kind of bugs are the greenkin.
[17]
the second line brings us to why this blessing is significant, you need it to reach unn.
now you also need the mantis claws to reach unn as well, there is a little bit of proof that unn could be the source of the acid water.
unn and acid waters
the first piece of evidence for unn being the source of acid water is that it is in all of her known areas of control, and in her rumored area of control.
[18]


the second piece of evidence for unn are durandoos.
it would make sense that the only creature able to withstand the acid are found in the area where the maker of the acid originates, greenpath and queen’s garden are the only places with durandoos, and they are the only enemy known to withstand acid, besides the creations of monomon, which given that they were created to guard her in her acid lake, is probably necessary.
the reason why i do not think that monomon created isma’s tear is that the dung defender says the isma gave “her blessing” to you, if monomon had made this blessing i think the ability would be a bit more widespread, and that it would have been mentioned somewhere in his archives.
[19]
mr. mushroom
however, this theory is contradicted by mr. mushroom’s lore tablet,[20] which tells us in each stanza where to find him.
this references isma’s grove as the source of the “acid blight” which means that the grove itself is the source of the acid.
while this does lead us to question who could be spreading the acidic waters around the whole kingdom, another question would be why do a greenpath bug and unn have the ability to touch it?
[21] could there have been more than one of isma’s blessing, we know that ogrim says that she gave you it, meaning that there is the possibility that there is more than one.
while this does directly go against the theory that unn created the acid, what it does not do is go against the theory that unn and isma are related.
maybe isma was naturally a part of the acid, like joni and lifeblood, and was able to give out many blessings.
[22] as one of the five knights it would be easy to see how monomon would get her hands on this blessing, but how unn does is unknown, unless there is some other connection.
exploring other connections
now we return back to isma.
the final piece of evidence in this theory for isma being related to unn and the greenkin is the “body” we find of hers.
her body has seemingly melded into the foliage, or it has caused the growth of the grove to encase her.
based on how ogrim has no idea of her death based off the line that he 


“i swore i'd visit, but... my duties... my oath…”


this is a case for the grove being there for a long period of time before her death, perhaps to allow her to be close to unn and her home while serving the pale king.
the plants also seem to show that she had some connection to plants, like the greenkin do.
and there is evidence from all of the greenkin that the call of unn has weakened, some of them still wait and heed the call, some have fallen to the radiance and her infection, there could have been some that went with the pale king.
it is for these reasons that i believe there is some merit to the theory of isma being related to unn, and could be a greenkin.
thank you


i would like to thank you all for taking the time to read!
also:
thank you to the #lore community for being awesome.
thank you @metal for the cool side theory!
thank you @sumwan for putting up with me and reviewing my docs!
and please note that these are just my beliefs, they are not fact, i would love to debate any part of this with whomever wishes!
further expansions to this doc are planned.
i wish to theorize about what the law of unn is even though i have no idea as to what it could entail,
discuss the shape of unn,
and maybe layout the king’s road if i feel it is needed.
~toxicbrain#4205
  


