the weapons of hallownest
the bugs of hallownest use various kinds of weapons to defend themselves against others.
ever since the rise of the infection, the use of weapons and armor by normal bugs has become a must for certain bugs who don’t have natural features to defend themselves.
this doc will be a compilation and description of the different types of weapons used by the bugs of hallownest.
1.
the nail
overview:
the nail is the primary weapon used by the bugs of hallownest.
a nail is a sword-like weapon with a sharp edge, able to pierce through almost everything.
several kinds of nails are encountered throughout the kingdom.
according to the backer lore doc, the nail’s 3 most common variations are the nail, the greatnail and the nail-lance.
“seen here in their 3 most common forms: the basic nail, great nail and nail lance.”
the nailsmith:


over time, nails start to develop cracks in themselves as they are used more often.
an example of this is shown by the knight’s “old nail.” once these nails have become old and worn out, they need to be sharpened in order to regain their lethal properties.
the only known npc in hollow knight who can upgrade nails is the nailsmith, living near the outskirts of the city of tears.
“your own nail is in quite a sorry state.
it's obviously not one of mine.
still, anything can be refined with enough effort and skill, even that broken blade.” - nailsmith
 
 he is able to sharpen the knight’s nail for an amount of geo and can upgrade the nail even further with the use of a rare metal called pale ore.
this shows that nails upgraded and with the use of pale ore can become even more lethal and deadly.
the upgradable versions of the nail are the sharpened nail (first image from left), channeled nail (second image from left), coiled nail (third image from left) and the pure nail (fourth image from left), with each version except the sharpened nail needing pale ore.
it is also worth noting that there is one bug seen in-game potentially using a channeled nail, that bug being perpetos noo, found in the spirits' glade.
“you're very impressive for such a small thing.
i'm something of a warrior myself, though even i'd hesitate to raise my nail against you.”
the ancient nailsmith:


one interesting thing to note is that in kingdom’s edge, you will find a deceased creature named the “ancient nailsmith.” in the room where he resides, there are several large nails which seem to be an early attempt at crafting a pure nail, except much larger.
the ancient nailsmith, beside his anvil and discarded nails.
such nails have never been seen before in hallownest, and are most likely one of the most ancient nails in existence.
it is unknown whether he succeeded in creating a pure nail, but from his dream nail dialogue:


“...pure…”


..we can imply that he was at least trying to attempt crafting a pure nail.
his nails certainly have a unique design to them, and are probably best suited for much larger bugs his size.
not much information about these ancient nails are given elsewhere in the game, therefore take these claims as speculation.
the discarded nails of the ancient nailsmith.
lastly, it is said that the quick slash charm, which is also found in the ancient nailsmith’s cave, is formed from the imperfect, discarded nails.
these nails apparently fused together over time to form this charm, which is something very interesting to note.
the greatnail:


the husk sentries in the city of tears are an example of bugs using nails for purposes of defense and security.
they were trained to protect the citizens of the city of tears, and they also use the different variations of a nail.
for example, the heavy sentry is stated to wield a “greatnail,” as said in the hunter’s journal:


  

“animated remains of a large hallownest sentry.
one of few in hallownest strong enough to wield a greatnail.”
  

a greatnail seems to be a larger version of a regular nail, and supposedly only strong bugs who can lift heavy objects can wield a greatnail.
a great husk sentry is also known to wield a greatnail along with a shell, therefore supporting that only strong bugs only have the ability to wield a greatnail.
“animated remains of a great sentry, the most elite of the city's guards.
wields a greatnail and shell.
its powerful attacks cause heavy damage.”


 there may be other bugs aside from these two who may wield a greatnail.
first of all, the nailmasters’ nails seem to bear a similar style to that of a greatnail, although it is never really confirmed.
another one who might be wielding a greatnail is the great nailsage sly, who may be small, but is able to wield a large nail which also has a resemblance to that of a greatnail.
the watcher knights also wield a large blade, although not as large as the nailmasters’ or sly’s, they use it in the same way.
(keep in mind that my claims about these nails aren’t stated in the game, these are just purely speculation)
  
  

  



however, it is worth noting that in the backer lore docs for hollow knight, it gave us an early design of the greatnail, which looks very similar to the nails of perpetos noo and the watcher knights.
the nail-lance:


the “nail-lance” is another variation of the nail.
only a few bugs are seen to use this weapon.
most of the bugs who use this weapon are the lance sentries found in the city of tears.
instead of slashing the nail to attack, they instead throw it and aim it at their foes.
they also sometimes charge at their foes with their nail-lance in front of them.
this is also stated in the hunter’s journal:


  

“winged sentry of hallownest equipped with a nail-lance.
charges at threats or throws its lance from a distance.” - hunter’s journal
  

 this form of attacking is really uncommon in hallownest, for we rarely see any bug attack like this.
other bugs known to wield this weapon are the mantis lords.
these three both hold nail-lances and attack similarly to the lance sentries.
they charge horizontally or vertically while thrusting their nail-lance forward when attacking.
the hunter even states that they wield nail-lances, or at least thin variations of them:


  

“leaders of the mantis tribe and its finest warriors.
they bear thin nail-lances and attack with blinding speed.” - hunter’s journal
  



the last bug known to use this weapon is thistlewind, a moth who is seen resting in the spirit’s glade.
thistlewind is one of the only other moths known to wield a weapon, the other being markoth.
thistlewind, wielding a nail-lance.
these three kinds of bugs are one of the few known to wield a nail-lance.
instead of being strong and massive to use the greatnail, bugs appear to have to be light and agile to use the nail-lance efficiently.
lastly, the nail-lance bears a similarity to another kind of weapon, a needle, but the two are different in their own ways.
cross variation:


one of the rarest variations of the nail is a kind of nail only used by the hollow knight, quirrel, the hundred nail warrior and possibly ze’mer.
these nails are never stated to differentiate from regular nails in the game, but they don’t look like any other nail we’ve seen before.
it appears to have this cross shape, and is a bit longer than an average nail.
the hundred nail warrior has one of these “cross” nails hanging on his back, accompanied by two other generic nails.
ze’mer also seems to have a similar nail, which also has this “crossed” shape, although it has a much wider flat surface, unlike the narrow surface these kinds of nails have.
ze’mer’s hut, with her nail lying against a wall.
these nails are similar in design, which is the reason i grouped them up together.
not much is known about these nail designs except that they are both slightly longer and thinner than the regular nail.
i theorize that these kinds of nails make it easier for certain bugs to use them and slash quickly, but we can never know for sure.
it is also worth noting that quirrel and the hollow knight both hold their nail backwards when idle.
quirrel, holding his crossed nail backwards.
revek’s nail:


this variation of the nail looks the least like one.
it is only used by one known bug in hallownest, him being revek.
“i assure you wanderer, my nail is sharp and i'll not hold back.” - revek.
revek wields some sort of curved nail, similar to a real life katana.
he is the only bug known to wield this variation of a nail.
the reason for making it curved is unknown, therefore we can’t say much about this particular weapon.
the way he slashes it involves dashing towards his foes, similar to the dash slash taught by nailmaster oro, although slightly different.
he also holds his curved nail backwards, which is only done by quirrel and the hollow knight.
revek, slashing his curved nail.
shellwood nail:


the last variation of the nail is its rarest, for only one known bug in hallownest uses it.
zote “the mighty” uses his own kind of nail, “life ender,” crafted from shellwood.
these shellwood nails are very blunt and unable to cut through tough shells of bugs.
zote eventually goes toe to toe with the knight in the colosseum, but his nail isn’t able to damage his opponent in the slightest.
this is most likely the reason no one uses shellwood to craft nails.
“a self-proclaimed knight, of no renown.
wields a nail he carved from shellwood, named 'life ender.” - hunter’s journal


  
  

zote and his shellwood nail.
there may be a few more types of nails, but we aren’t given substantial information about them.
this screenshot from the wanderer’s journal seems to depict most available types of nails (and an additional shell.)
“but as the great nailsage i must recognise your skill.
you have mastered the arts of my remaining pupils.
now tradition decrees you too may hold the symbol.
wear it proudly, nailmaster.
you shall be the last to receive its like.” - sly


2.
the needle
overview:


the “needle” is an extremely rare weapon which is almost exclusively tied to one major character: hornet.
the weapon itself isn’t only used by hornet, as william pellen himself states that there are probably other needles around.
as of now, we have barely enough information to make a full section to fully analyze this, but this is all we know of needles so far.
one interesting thing to note is that william from team cherry states in a reddit ama that it requires a skilled bug to use a needle, which explains why only a few bugs are seen using it in the game itself.
hornet’s needle:
  

  

“skilled protector of hallownest's ruins.
wields a needle and thread.” 


a needle is a thin, pointed weapon able to pierce through enemies with little difficulty, as opposed to the nail’s slashing strength.
it comes with a little hole at its edge, in which silk can be threaded through.
hornet, piercing her needle against quirrel’s mask.
hornet uses the needle to pierce through enemies with its sharp tip.
the needle then retracts back to hornet with the use of her silk.
she can also use her needle in a way similar to slashing with a nail.
for extra mobility, hornet can latch onto platforms with her needle and launch herself towards it.
waldie’s needle:


 although hornet may be the only main character to use a needle, there is actually another bug seen to wield a needle named waldie.
“don't judge me by appearance.” - waldie.
waldie is a deceased bug who can be found in the spirit’s glade.
the weapon that he holds has a resemblance to a needle.
his weapon has a small hole at its handle, and presumably waldie places thread through it.
his weapon is slightly thicker than hornet’s needle, so it is unknown if these two weapons are the same or not.
waldie’s blade might be a thicker variation of a needle, or hornet’s needle might be a thinner variation.
for now, this is all we are truly sure of when it comes to a needle.
this will be updated once we receive further news on how hornet (and possibly other bugs) use this delicate weapon.
“prove yourself ready to face it.
i'll not hold back.
my needle is lethal and i'd feel no sadness in a weakling's demise.” - hornet






3.
the club

overview: 


the club seems to be a more uncivilized and a not very highly regarded weapon in hallownest seemingly most used by brutes and the more lowly of explorers that wander the kingdom.
it is a blunt and heavy weapon used to knock down foes.
only a few bugs in hallownest are known to use the club, a few of these bugs being the husk guards and cloth.
these bugs use the club brutishly, nearly carelessly and without any of the elegance of the nail or needle users.
in one of sly’s trance dialogues, you can hear him discipling oro, one of his past students, for “wielding his nail like a club” further implying that clubs were and are less civilized than nails or needles.
“...ugghh, oro you oaf.... you wield your nail... like a club…” - sly.


club-users often swing their club to the ground, trying to crush their opponent in the process.
this style of fighting is very different from the precise way of throwing a needle.
instead of accurately targeting your opponents weak spots, club-users just smash their clubs with pure force, without properly aiming.
clubs may have been a primal weapon of hallownest before modern nails became much more common and widespread, though this is never stated in the game.
although nails may be superior in combat, club-users certainly still do prove a challenge if they use it correctly, as cloth was able to strike down the traitor lord with her experience in club-wielding.
another interesting note from the wanderer’s journal to consider is that cloth’s club seems to be carved from the tooth of a husk.
in the original backer lore docs, the clubs were referred to as teeth, which is where the inspiration for this detail likely came from.
the hunter also states that the husk guards are forced to steal their weapons from the “remains of other creatures,” as shown here.
“larger and stronger than their brothers, these bugs are still forced to steal their weapons from the remains of other creatures.”






“you act so confident in battle.
you show no fear before your foes.
i'll try my best to do the same.” - cloth


4.
the claw-blade
overview:
claw-blades are very uncommon weapons in hallownest, for they are only used by a select few in-game.
while many of the bugs stated in this section aren’t said to wield claw-blades in the game, their weapons look very similar to them.
the backer lore doc states that the claw-blade is a weapon crafted from the “fore-limb” of a larger creature.
therefore those who wield such claw-blades must have gotten it from large bugs who are most likely deceased, similar to how club-users gather the teeth of bugs to form their weapons.
it is also worth noting the visual similarities between the claw-blade, and the mantis claw, an item found in the mantis village used for the wall-climb ability, which is also said to have been fashioned from bone.
colosseum weapons: 


most fools of the colosseum don’t use the traditional weapons found in hallownest.
instead, they use weapons that look similar to claw-blades to replace nails.
the reason for this is unknown.
not much information has been spread regarding these weapons.
shielded fools use these curved blades which are also used by the winged fools.
sturdy fools use these crescent shaped blades.
the heavy fool also has this curved, pointed blade, a pattern shared by the other fools.
and lastly, the god tamer also has a curved, pointed blade.
there is no canonical explanation as to why the fools have claw-blades instead of nails, therefore it should be safe to assume that the colosseum grants bugs these sorts of weapons.
it is worth noting that in the resting pit of the colosseum, a bench with two nails lying on it is seen.
however, this is kind of odd considering that no fools in the colosseum are seen using nails at all.
it could be that these nails were left there by a traveler who came to the colosseum, or that the colosseum distributed nails to the fools before, but they resorted to giving out claw-blades instead.
the reason is really up for speculation.
a bench with two nails on it, found in the resting pit.
kingsmould claw-blade:
       


                                         
  

“guard construct of hallownest's palace and skilled wielder of the curved claw-blade.
its heavy white armour protects a fragile body.”


the kingsmoulds, void constructs built to guard the white palace by the pale king, also wield a claw-blade.
in the hunter’s journal entry for the kingsmould, it states that this particular kind of claw-blade is “curved,” therefore separating it from the other kinds of claw-blades.
however, instead of wielding it like a normal blade always, they instead throw it like a boomerang if their opponent is afar.
this may be the reason for it’s curviness.
perhaps the claw-blade needs to be curvy in order to throw it much more efficiently, but that is just baseless speculation.
spirit weapons:


 i should mention how several bugs from the spirit’s glade use weapons of the same curved, pointed style.
these bugs are atra, garro, kcin, hex, and boss (from left to right).
not much is known about these bugs, and we know even less about their weapons, except for the fact that they all look similar to the claw-blade.
they most likely got their weapons from larger bugs and took out their forelimbs, just as the backer lore doc says.
another bug who wields a similar weapon crafted from the limb of a bug is galien, a deceased warrior found in deepnest, however, he is also enlisted in another category.
we’ll instead be discussing his weapon over there and not here.
“a true fool keeps on fighting, even when there is no more glory to be gained.” - little fool
















5.
dream boss weapons
overview:


various dream bosses and dream warriors use unique dream-based attacks and projectiles to defeat you in battle.
however, while many of these used by the warriors are usually purely dream-based magic (like no eyes’ children spirits or gorb’s spokes), some of these are based on weapons they might have used when they were alive, and these are the ones that will be listed below.
we will not be listing down the weapons that are completely dream-magic projectiles (as this would complicate the doc too much), without any proven ties to the real world.
markoth’s dreamshield and nail-projectiles:
  
  
  

  

“lingering dream of a fallen warrior.
only member of his forgotten tribe to take up a weapon.”


markoth is the one of the only members of the moth tribe known to take up a weapon, the other being thistlewind.
he wields a shield and several nails, both of which can be found lying beside his corpse in kingdom’s edge.
he is also in possession of a dreamshield, which is a charm the knight can acquire in the resting grounds, the home of the moth tribe.
his shield also doubles as a defense and attack.
in the dream boss, markoth’s various nails shoot toward the knight, similar to how nail-lances are thrown.
his shield encircles him and sometimes spins quickly and extends its orbit before retracting back to markoth’s ghost.
not much is known about the weaponry of the moth tribe.
both markoth and thistlewind use weapons that are very common in hallownest, with the exception being markoth’s dreamshield.
the moths are stated to be a passive species, so it would make sense as to why they don’t have many unique weapons other than the dreamshield.
galien’s claw-blade:
  
  

                                 
“lingering dream of a fallen warrior.
trained in the wilds bordering the kingdom, hoping to become a knight.”


galien is a warrior found in deepnest who claims to be the strongest in the kingdom.
however, he eventually got defeated and died in the caves of deepnest.
he wielded a scythe-looking weapon which he spins around rapidly.
when attacking, galien uses his scythe and spins it around, resulting in the scythe bouncing violently across the floor as his main attack.
this is the only attack he has that involves his scythe.
not much else is known about his other ways of using his scythe.
it is the only scythe we see in hallownest.
it appears to be made of some kind of bug limb, similar to how claw-blades are crafted.
perhaps these two weapons are the same, just shaped differently.
the kingsmoulds spin their claw-blades like a boomerang, drawing another similarity to the spinning claw-blade of galien.
“a knight strives not only to protect the land and its people, but the hopes and dreams of the kingdom.” - galien.
6.
other weapons
overview:

alongside all of these, there are also some rare weapons that certain bugs use.
however, these weapons are not common enough in hallownest to be given its own section, and don’t fit into any previous category which explains why they’ll be grouped up in “other weapons.”

hive knight’s blade:
  

  

“loyal protector of the hive's queen.
flightless but ferocious in battle.” 


the hive knight is a flightless bee who doesn’t rely on his natural attacks, but relies on melee combat.
he wields a thin blade, thinner than a regular nail.
he attacks with swift slashes from his blade, similar to the way nail-users slash quickly in front of them.
similar to the weapons used by the fools, not much information is given about the hive knight’s weapon, for he is the only one known to use it in hallownest.
the hive knight, slashing his weapon like a nail.
one interesting thing to note here is that his weapon resembles a spine.
spines are thin projectiles that pierce enemies.
we get a clear glimpse of what spines look like in the backer lore doc:
“a common projectile type, usually expelled from the creature itself, though some inventive types have constructed tools to perform the same function.”


the hive knight’s blade looks awfully similar to these “spines,” however, he uses his blade as a melee weapon, not a projectile.
he does indeed use spines during his battle with the knight, so perhaps these spines and the hive knight’s blade are constructed of the same material.
the false knight’s mace:
“a maggot driven mad by a strange force.
inhabits a stolen armoured shell.”.
the false knight is a maggot who has stolen the armor of one of the five great knights, mighty hegemol.
the false knight wields a mace with an armoured bug at its tip.
this bug appears to have been captured and placed on the mace, against its will.
this is proven by the armoured bug’s dream nail dialogue:
  



“free at last!” - armoured bug.
it is unknown if mighty hegemol wielded this weapon, for in every place we see glimpses of hegemol, none of them show a mace of any kind.
this mace is often used like a club.
the false knight slams it downward recklessly, similar to how club users, like the husk guards, attack the knight.
this mace also appears to create shockwaves.
husk miner claw-pick:


the miners at the crystal peak also wield claw-picks (also visually similar to the mantis claw, to some extent) that aren’t present anywhere else in the game.
“remains of a bug drawn to the crystal peak for its precious crystal.
its claw-pick now doubles as a fierce weapon.”


these bugs use these claw-picks to mine at the crystals in the crystal peak.
when attacked, they, if you are in close range, slash at you with the claw-pick like a regular nail, but if afar, they throw it at you.
there isn’t much else to be said about these weapons as we aren’t given much unique information about them.
it could perhaps be inferred that these (and the kingsmould claw-blade) could be carved from actual bones as the mantis claw is, but that would be baseless and they could just be called that due to their shape.
the pinblade:


most scholars in the soul sanctum don’t wield a weapon and instead wield soul, however, the soul warriors in the sanctum use both to enhance their combat skills.
“learned bug, wielding a refined pinblade.
enhances its combat prowess with harvested soul.”- hunter’s journal.
these pinblades are only used by the soul warriors.
these kinds of weapons are much thinner than a regular nail.
all we know is that these weapons are very rare and are exclusively used by the soul warriors only.
the fact that it can be “refined” is interesting though.
perhaps these pinblades can be upgraded to better versions, similar to the regular nail, but this is purely speculation.
pale lurker’s star-shaped spikes:

  
these spikes are exclusively used by only one enemy in the game: the pale lurker.
this weapon is seen nowhere else in the game.
it is an indestructible projectile which has the ability to retract and expand to smaller or larger sizes respectively.
from what we see in-game, it is thrown at enemies to pierce them with spikes.
however, instead of being directly thrown at an enemy, it can be thrown at the floor instead, then it’s spikes will expand and it will act as a spiked-floor, of sorts.
the cause of the rarity of these projectiles are unknown, so the reason that the pale lurker has one of these is up for speculation.
it could be that these spikes were once distributed to warriors of the colosseum around the time pale lurker was fighting in the colosseum, or it was exclusively made for her once she became a champion.
“but... in the end?
if strength cannot save you, then what can...?” - failed champion
