introduction
   what are "gods"?
the main time this term is used is with the godseekers, albeit their definition ranks common entities that aren't unique (such as the gruz mother) as a god, the same term they use for entities like the pure vessel.
another time it is used is in regards to the pale king and white lady in the birthplace cutscene, with the text saying vessels are "born of god and void", which seems to be the more literal definition which only applies to higher beings.
however, this document will be explaining the godseekers' definition.
what determines godliness?
when examining the godseeker's dialogue, it appears that all beings they determine to be gods are ones that have a godly resonance they can attune to.
when given the delicate flower, the godseeker talks about how gods can come in many shapes, and wonders if the delicate flower is some byproduct of a god, but determines it has "no tune" and says that if it does sing  they cannot detect it [1].
when first talked to in the pantheon of the master, the godseeker also says that the knight is disrupting the "godly resonances" they attuned to with its presence, creating "much discord" [2].
the knight causing chaos with its presence is likely the cause of the godseeker's scorn throughout much of the pantheons, but what makes it do so?
it could be similar to pure vessel, where the godseeker says it's silence "nearly deafens" them [3], which lines up with what the godseeker said in pantheon of the master, with the knight drowning out the "godly resonances".
this does check out as void can have the effect of dampening sound, seen when the pure vessel roars, or the knight takes damage.
however, when the knight becomes void given focus (aka the "shade lord"),the godseeker says that "our tune rings rich with thine brilliance" [4] which can be seen as them actually attuning to it despite the silence of the void.
this also makes senset as the godseeker's attunement throughout the pantheon of hallownest is what triggers it to become void given focus when fighting the absolute radiance, and not just becoming void given form again.
the godseekers could also still attune to pure vessel, despite it's overwhelming silence [5].
so after examining this, it seems powerful entities arbitrarily have a "godly resonance" which the godseekers can attune to as the godtuner description says it is a "device that resonates with beings of great power."
even void which drowned out the other resonances and has a silencing effect on sound could be attuned to.
this resonance explains why bugs like the brooding mawleks are considered a god, alongside higher beings like unn.
hall of gods
   the hall of gods is self explanatory, it houses statues of imprints [6] of the gods, and when challenged, allow a boss to be fought infinitely many times on varying difficulties.
however, when inspecting the backgrounds of certain statues, common enemies like the husk hornhead or vengefly can be seen in the background, leading some to wonder why they would be in a place reserved for the gods.
are they too considered gods?
the answer is likely no, the godseekers attune to gods to ascend higher and to more powerful gods until they finally bridge in the absolute radiance after attuning to pure vessel in pantheon of the knight [7][8].
so what are they doing there?
well, perhaps to first attune to the vengefly king and draw it into godhome and the hall of gods, they had to attune to whatever resonance these weaker, mortal beings had due to the infection, which is rad's influence, and that allowed them to start reaching the gods.
maybe they'd be something like demigods or pseudo gods to the godseekers, or it's really just nothing but a minor detail.
conclusion
   to wrap things up, what determines a "god" for godseekers is having a "godly resonance" or tune that they can focus their thoughts on and attune to, which is quite arbitrary, but also alright for explaining why some entities are "gods" and others are not.
as for the hall of gods statues of common enemies, it appears that they were some of the first ones attuned to in order to ascend and attune to the vengefly king and from there, the rest of the gods.
if there are any questions or alternate answers you have, please contact mushspore#9594 on discord.
special thanks to sumwan for providing screenshots and maintaining the lore archives, and to the lore regulars for getting me into the lore, and assisting in the proofreading of the doc.
