this document was written by
noxious vertigo#2425 based on drafts by mushpore#7352.
for any queries please message either of us on discord.
introduction
   'zote the mighty' is a relatively popular character within the hollow knight community and is often found within most memes surrounding the game due to his ironically braggadocious personality and demeanor.
due to his popularity however, there are often many misconceptions about zote and what his overall character implies.
this includes but is not limited to theories such as him being a vessel like the knight due to their seemingly alike appearance, or him having origins coming from hallownest.
this document will address such theories, as well as give an overview of his overarching character too.
firstly, we'll start off by clearing up the vessel misconception, and before moving on to talk about his dream form (grey prince zote) and his character traits.
please note that all of the sources used will be included and found at the end of the document.
is zote a vessel?
short answer?
no.
long answer?
zote doesn't fulfill the criteria of a vessel, exhibits traits the parents of the vessels lack, and also hails from an entirely different land outside of hallownest too.
starting off with the former point, we can begin by looking at this quote from the pale king when describing the pure vessel, talking of what a truly hollow vessel should have.
"no mind to think.
no will to break.
no voice to cry suffering.
born of god and void."
while vessels themselves do not exhibit the first two desired traits for being hollow (see the lore archives for the doc "can vessels be hollow?
"), they do pertain to the subsequent requirements.
'no voice to cry suffering.'
is self explanatory, as the vessels cannot speak in any way.
this is due to the fact that when the void entered their bodies it hollowed out the organs needed for speech, smell and other senses.
this left them having nothing but an empty shell constraining the void which then reanimated the shell, thus forming the vessels.
zote however very clearly possesses the ability to speak and is seen doing so almost constantly.
to further this point zote actually has more speech than anyone else in the game, with him having over 2600 words of dialogue.
'born of god and void' is also important to note as zote is pathetically weak, and whilst his shell may be more durable than common bugs, he's still nowhere near as durable as hornet, broken vessel or the hollow knight (especially not in it's prime as pure vessel).
he also exhibits no void-like qualities (grey prince zote will be addressed later), and his shell is much duller than the knight's, hornet's, or the hollow knight's, with theirs being noticeably paler.
[1][2] 
  



   as for exhibiting traits the pale king and white lady lack, the most obvious is notably his mouth.
this is important because the pale king, white lady, hollow knight, hornet, knight, and vessels respectively do not possess one (even on official art where extra detail like eyehole ridges are shown).
another trait to note are the eyebag-esque lines he has, which again are qualities the pk, wl and their offspring lack.
lastly, zote comes from another land.
his dream nail dialogue mentions his home is a dreary place much like dirtmouth [3], and as such many of his descriptors of dirtmouth like squalid or dingy may apply as well to his original home too.
as such a conclusion can potentially be drawn to suggest that zote was initially from a small and dismal village.
we know for a fact that the village he describes as his home is not dirtmouth itself, as he says he only came to hallownest to fulfill a promise he made to himself consisting of glory [4][5].
with all this put together, we can safely conclude that zote is neither from hallownest nor a vessel.
the reason he resembles one (outside of being a parody of the knight), is because vessels resemble common bugs like zote instead of the opposite way around [6].
grey prince zote
   many people try to use 'grey prince zote' as an argument for zote being void due to the death animation, however the glaring issue with this is that grey prince zote is bretta's deluded image of who zote is as opposed to being a true, accurate representation of him.
on a side note, it's also curious how her diary entries seem to be heavily based on what occured after the knight saves her and calls them her "white saviour'', but when zote arrives decides to buy into everything he says about her former hero, even calling the knight a "vicious beast".
the zoteling entries also appear to be bretta's new fantasy with her grey prince.
to get back on topic, we know that grey prince zote isn't accurately depicting zote himself because all of the zotelings and grey prince zote are described as a 'figment of an obsessed mind.'
in the start of all of their journal entries.
additionally, the hall of gods entry for grey prince zote is as follows: 




"i serve my queen inside her dreams"
"false god conjured by the lonely"




   there are two things to look at here.
'inside her dreams' implies grey prince zote only exists within bretta's mind, and 'conjured by the lonely' states that grey prince zote was created by bretta and her loneliness, which ultimately lead to her falling head over heels for zote.
so why do people think grey prince zote is void?
well, the death animation shows him exploding into an outburst of black particles, before then becoming a column of darkness that surges upwards leaving only a couple of particles behind at which point the fight concludes.
while there's not much of an in-universe explanation for this void-like stuff, let us look at it from a more outside perspective instead.
zote is meant to be a comedic parody of the knight, very much resembling a more elderly ragged version of him, who replaces the knight as bretta's obsession and yet is far less capable (his attacks consist of harmlessly swinging a nonmetallic nail [7][8], and tripping).
everytime zote is encountered, he's too egotistical to even realize how he'd likely end up dead if the knight doesn't save him.
for example, after being freed from the vengefly king he believes himself to be indestructible and that the knight only defeated the vengefly king because it's mandibles were dulled from chewing on zote [9].
if not saved, zote ends up being eaten and killed by it, likely dying whilst still thinking he was invincible.
grey prince zote takes the comedic parody and cranks it up even further, shown by the absurd list of titles, sound effects and constant tripping and falling which actually serve as a challenging ‘accidental’ attack.
with this in mind it’s likely that him being void only further cements the idea of him being a parody of the knight.
this is the most likely explanation for grey prince zote being composed of void, as other common theories are often quite far-fetched and have a lot of stretches.
zote's personality
   zote is quite the "interesting" character.
despite knowing he didn't achieve the feats he still takes credit for them and likely truly believes he came out on top, such as with the vengefly king where his dn dialogue shows he knows the knight killed it yet in dirtmouth still steals all the glory of killing it [9][10].
he’s often found rambling to no-one further pushing the idea that he is incredibly full of himself.
after returning from the colosseum of fools after a humiliating defeat, he takes a helmet of one of the dead fools and takes it to dirtmouth to tell bretta about how he supposedly triumphed in battle and the audience erupted into cheering at his victory[11] when in actuality the crowd all laugh at him when he is defeated in the trial.
another key part of zote's character is how absurdly egotistical he is, believing himself to be undefeatable [9], believing he is a knight of great renown and that everyone is impressed with him in dirtmouth after taking credit for slaying the vengefly king despite nobody caring.
he truly thinks he is the apex predator of deepnest [12], and he thinks he is the one who humiliated the knight according to his dreamnail dialogue when defeated in the colosseum as mentioned previously [13].
this mainly serves to further his role as a comedic parody to provide a break from the seriousness of the game.
the belief that he's an almighty knight of great renown could've come from trauma in his past, considering how his precepts talk about the past as being painful and something to be avoided [14][15] and portray his family, potential lovers, and friends to be foes.
this is shown through his 57 precepts, where zote mentions in precept 11 how mothers will always betray you [16], precept 43 about brothers potentially implies that an incident occured between him and a brother that caused his sibling to try and apologize for something [17], and finally in precept 52 about being wary of the jealousy of fathers and claims that they don’t want you to surpass themselves, and you must leave them behind and forge your own path [18].
it could be possible that this is why zote claims he is a knight of great renown, in an attempt to exceed his father, further cemented by his dreamnail dialogue at the colosseum which shows he is trying to prove himself to his father [19].
he also acts like he may have potentially been left by someone who promised betrothal [20], and that a friend had tried to hurt him previously at one point [21].
zote also mentions shedding his last tear long ago, perhaps as a result of the lover who promised betrothal but ultimately moved on [22].
all in all, he certainly seems to have experienced some traumatic event in the past which causes it to be incredibly painful for him.
recalling back to how zote is used as comedic relief, it further adds to his irony that with everything he has potentially gone through he still gets mocked further in the colosseum when he's defeated despite thinking he came out on top.
it’s also suggested that zote is distrustful and a thief through precept 37 [23].
shellwood
   this section is primarily speculative, but shellwood is most likely the hk universe equivalent of wood.
tc have stated in dev notes that trees don't exist, that wl is a root, and that both greenpath and the queen's gardens don't have anything resembling trees.
so where does all the wood in constructions like the ancestral mound, crystal peak, breakable walls, or deepnest come from?
well, the ancestral mound is "constructed from the bones and shells of innumerable dead creatures" [24], which is easily seen through the numerous mounted skulls found mounted on poles and littering the ground.
the poles themselves are very reminiscent of wood, and as such we can make a relatively valid conclusion that this wood also comes from the shells of bugs too due to the description given.
the name itself (shell-wood) also implies this.
in silksong,  whilst still in development and subject to change, hornet obtains a material called shell shards from destroying what appears to be fossilized bugs, and these could potentially be a component in shellwood.
regardless, we have no information on this and it is simply a small detail to keep into consideration.
