Walt Disney has announced that tickets for The Incredibles 2 have gone on sale, and yes, there is a 60-second teaser to celebrate the announcement. It's going to be fascinating to watch this much-anticipated Pixar sequel battle it out with Universal/Comcast Corp.'s Jurassic World: Fallen Kingdom for the (domestic) silver medal this summer.Precedent suggests that Jurassic World 2 has the edge, since the last movie earned $652 million domestic and even a 1/3 comedown gets it to $434m. But Incredibles 2 could easily pull Finding Dory-level ($486m domestic) business, especially coming after a six-month drought in major animated features and with a month to itself before Hotel Transylvania 3. FYI - The Incredibles earned $261m domestic from a $70m debut in November 2004, which would be around $386m from a $103m debut weekend when adjusted for inflation.You can now buy tickets online (or at the theater if you're old-fashioned) for the 118-minute (!) animated sequel. Yes, that's the second-longest American animated movie of all time (behind the 120-minute Fantasia) besting The Incredibles (115 minutes), Beowulf (115 minutes of pure awesome) and the 116-minute Cars. My older two kids will be fine. But if my three-year-old wants to see it, we may have to drive down to that Cinepolis playground theater for the occasion. For those who want some kind of extra reward for buying tickets or seeing a movie, there will be a variety of options. To wit...On June 14, and this paragraph is just cribbed from the official press release, the first 1,000 guests who experience Incredibles 2 in IMAX at Regal Cinemas will receive an exclusive collectible ticket. A poster version of the collectible ticket art will be available to IMAX guests in the Regal Crown Club store. Fans who see Incredibles 2 in Cinemark XD opening weekend will receive a collectible poster. As part of the advanced ticketing promotion, at Alamo Drafthouse you can add an exclusive Incredibles 2 glass by Mondo to your ticket purchase. Fans also have the chance to purchase a one-of-a-kind sketchbook, both designed by artist Dave Perillo. Each fan buying tickets to Incredibles 2 on Fandango will receive a gift-with-purchase. Guests can choose from one of two posters available in the Fandango FanShop.I have to assume that folks who preorder their tickets at Cinepolis or Studio Movie Grill get a free kid's meal or a free cheese-and-fruit plate, moviegoers who pre-order for D-Box get a complimentary Incredibles 2 barf bag and audiences preordering for 4DX get a bucket of water dumped on their head or a sharp punch to the spine. Jokes aside (I kid because I love), the big deal for me is the announced IMAX double feature. Folks willing to pay around $30 can see The Incredibles and The Incredibles 2 in IMAX.That's neat because The Incredibles never played in straight-up IMAX during its initial theatrical run, as it opened a week before the game-changing 3D IMAX version of The Polar Express. That's doubly interesting because the double feature takes place on June 13 at 6:00 p.m., or 23 hours before the film's first official Thursday preview screenings (which start as early as 5:00 p.m.). That's a pretty obvious sign that Disney and Pixar think that Brad Bird has delivered a sequel good enough to make naysayers like me eat a little crow.No, I don't know when it'll start screening or when the review embargo breaks, but my kids are unnaturally excited for this animated sequel. They aren't super into pop culture, but the entire family is oddly thrilled for this one. That most recent trailer plays like gangbusters on an IMAX screen, and so does the Jurassic World trailer for that matter. Both trailers play so much better on a giant movie screen (obviously) that it's almost detrimental for them to debut online for laptop/smartphone consumption.  Oh, and yes, Paramount/Viacom Inc.'s first Mission: Impossible Fallout trailer remains one of the best movies of 2018.